PM-DOS - Protected Mode DOS, a 32-bit DOS kernel
================================================
Started 2026-08-06.  Version 0.32.

The VDM - running 16-bit DOS programs
-------------------------------------
Started 2026-08-08.  IO\VM86.INC (the monitor) and DOS\VDM.INC (the
DOS side).  First 16-bit instructions executed 2026-08-08: a
hand-assembled real-mode program doing INT 21h AH=09h and AH=4Ch, its
output printed by the 32-bit kernel, verified in DOSBox.

WHERE THE SPLIT IS.  The monitor lives in PMIO, because it is about
the CPU - a TSS, an IOPL, a fault handler - and PMIO is where the
hardware lives.  The DOS side lives in PMDOS, because it is about
INT 21h.  They meet at one service, IOS_V86RUN, and the shape of it is
a VM exit loop: hand over a context, get it back when the guest does
something that needs answering, answer it, hand it over again.  The
monitor deals with CLI, STI, PUSHF, POPF, IRET and with reflecting
untrapped interrupts into the guest's own IVT, and never troubles the
caller with any of them.  A bitmap in the context says which vectors
the caller wants; PM-DOS claims 20h-2Fh and lets INT 10h and INT 16h
reflect to the BIOS, which is how they work with no code at all.

THREE THINGS MAKE V86 GO, and the third is not in the manuals'
introductions:
  - A TSS.  V86 runs at CPL 3, so every fault switches stacks through
    SS0:ESP0.  Without a loaded task register the first INT a DOS
    program executes triple-faults the machine.
  - IOPL 0 in the guest's flags.  THAT is the mechanism - it is what
    makes INT, IRET, CLI, STI, PUSHF and POPF fault into the monitor
    instead of running for real.  A guest at IOPL 3 dispatches its own
    interrupts through the IVT and the monitor never sees them.
  - An 8K I/O permission bitmap of zeros in the TSS.  In V86 mode IOPL
    does NOT govern IN and OUT; only the bitmap does.  All-zeros gives
    the guest every port, so it can drive hardware with no emulation
    at all.  Individual bits get set when a device needs virtualising,
    and that is the hook the whole device story will hang off.

THE INTERRUPT FLAG IS VIRTUAL.  The guest always runs with the real IF
set, because a DOS program must not be able to stop the system timer;
its CLI and STI move a flag of ours, and PUSHF, POPF and IRET are
doctored to show it that flag instead of the real one.

CONVENTIONAL MEMORY, THE PSP AND THE .COM LOADER came next, and on
2026-08-08 a real 16-bit .COM read off the disk ran to completion.
DOS\LOWMEM.INC is the arena a DOS program can see: genuine 16-byte
MCBs, 'M' blocks ending in a 'Z', owner = PSP segment, length in
paragraphs, first fit, coalescing on free.  It is deliberately NOT
the kernel's own arena (ARENA.INC, above 2MB, 32-bit, owner-id based)
because programs WALK this chain - MEM does, installers do - so it
has to be the real article rather than a convenient approximation.
Its constants are RMCB_* because ARENA.INC already owns MCB_*.

THE BRIDGE IS THE INTERESTING PART, and the decision worth recording
is that a V86 guest's INT 21h is served by THE KERNEL'S OWN HANDLERS -
the same i21_table the 32-bit side dispatches through.  DOS is not
reimplemented for 16-bit callers.  All that stands between them is
translation: the guest says DS:DX, the kernel wants one flat address,
so the bridge multiplies the segment by sixteen and hands the same
handler the same request.  k21 manufactures the frame those handlers
read their registers out of - pushad's eight dwords, the saved EBP,
then EIP/CS/FLAGS, forty-eight bytes - which makes the whole DOS API
callable from anywhere in the kernel, and the loader uses it too.
A table says which register holds a pointer for each function; that
table is the entire 16-bit-to-32-bit impedance match.
The pay-off is that file handling, searches and the long-name calls
worked the day the bridge did, because they are code that was already
there and already tested.

Some things cannot be passed through, and they are exactly the places
where "a program" means something different on each side: 48h/49h/4Ah
(the guest's memory is the DOS arena below 1MB, not the kernel's),
00h/4Ch/31h (terminate ends the VM), 62h (a PSP is a segment here),
2Fh (the DTA is a far pointer) and 4Bh (refused until a VM can nest).
On the way out the guest's handles are swept and its memory reclaimed
by PSP segment - it gets its own owner id for the purpose, or its open
files would belong to the shell and outlive it.

TWO MORE JOINED THAT LIST when the .EXE loader went in, and both would
have been quiet, expensive bugs:

  25h/35h, set and get an interrupt vector.  The kernel's 25h installs
  a 32-bit protected-mode IDT gate.  A guest calling it would point a
  gate at a real-mode segment:offset pair, and the next interrupt of
  that number would jump into nowhere in ring 0.  What a guest means
  by a vector is a slot in the real-mode IVT at 0:0 - which is where
  the monitor reflects untrapped interrupts - so that is where these
  two now read and write.  Hooking 24h, 1Bh, 23h or the timer is
  ordinary behaviour for a DOS program; it has to work.

  42h, seek.  CX:DX in and DX:AX out are each ONE 32-bit number split
  across two registers, and the kernel's own 42h takes the whole
  offset in ECX (see the 32-bit API notes below).  The generic path
  would have passed CX alone and returned the low half twice, so any
  file over 64K would have seeked to the wrong place and read the
  wrong bytes without ever reporting an error.

The proof is TOOLS\HELLO.ASM, an ordinary real-mode .COM that knows
nothing about any of this: it prints, asks 30h for the version, 62h
for its PSP, shrinks itself with 4Ah, allocates with 48h, frees with
49h, and opens and reads README.TXT.  Its output is arithmetic that
can be checked: PSP at 3701, shrink to 1000h paragraphs, and 48h
answers 4702 - 3701 + 1000h + one paragraph for the new MCB header.
"48h refused" before the 4Ah was added was not a bug either: a .COM
is handed every free paragraph, so allocation MUST fail until it
gives some back, which is what DOS did and what programs expect.

THE .EXE LOADER followed the same day.  It is arithmetic and one loop:
work out how much of the file is program, find somewhere to put it,
read it in, then walk the fixup table adding the load segment to every
segment word the linker could not know the value of.  CS:IP and SS:SP
in the header get the same treatment.

WHICH KIND OF PROGRAM IT IS COMES OUT OF THE FILE, NOT THE NAME.  DOS
always worked that way and it matters: LINK will happily produce an
.EXE called SOMETHING.COM, several utilities shipped exactly like
that, and a loader that trusts the extension runs the MZ header as
code.  vdm_load reads the first 28 bytes, looks for the signature, and
lets the answer decide; the extension is a hint for humans.

Three details in the header are easy to get wrong and all three cost
something silent if they are:

  CBLP is the number of valid bytes in the LAST page, and ZERO MEANS
  THE LAST PAGE IS FULL, not empty.  Read it as "empty" and every
  program that happens to end on a page boundary loses 512 bytes.

  MAXALLOC is 0FFFFh in nearly every .EXE ever linked, so allocating
  it always fails.  The loader is really driven by MINALLOC: ask for
  the maximum, take the largest run there is when that fails, and
  refuse only if even the minimum will not fit.

  THE LOAD MODULE STARTS AT PSP + 10h, and that is what every fixup is
  relative to.  Get it wrong by one paragraph and the program runs for
  a while and then dies somewhere unrelated - the worst kind of wrong.

TOOLS\HELLOX.ASM is the proof, and it was deliberately made harder
than the first draft.  That draft had a far call inside its only code
segment; the assembler quietly made it near, the file came out with a
single fixup, and the fixup loop was barely exercised.  The version
that ships has four segments - two code, one data, one stack - a far
call to the SECOND code segment (a real 9Ah with a segment fixup), and
a table of four far pointers it walks at run time.  Seven fixups in
two different segments, and a 64-byte header rather than a 48-byte
one.  Its output is checkable arithmetic again: PSP 0D01, load segment
0D11 = PSP + 10h, code segment 0D4A = 0D11 + the header's relative CS
of 0039, and all four pointers followed.

PMIO MOVED ABOVE 1MB next, which is what the 588K in the map is.  The
mechanism is worth recording because it needed no boot-sector change
at all.  A 512-byte boot sector can do one simple thing - read the
file into one segment - so it still drops all of PMIO.SYS at 2000:0000
and jumps there.  The stub then puts ITSELF where it wants to be: it
copies its own 8K down to 0B00:0000 and far-jumps to the copy, and
once unreal mode is up it blits its protected-mode half from 22000h to
200000h and enters protected mode there.  Everything before the
self-copy is position independent - a near jump, CS-relative data, and
nothing else - which is the only thing that has to be true for it to
work.  The IDT, the kernel stack and the TSS went up with it.

THE TRAP THAT WOULD HAVE EATEN IT: FL_FATBUF was at 0000B000h and
FL_DIRBUF at 0000D000h - the boot loader's FAT window and directory
sector - which is exactly where the relocated stub and the first page
of the DOS box now live.  The FAT window would have overwritten the
very code reading it, on the first cluster of the first file.  They
moved to 1000h/1400h, under a real-mode stack that is entered at 7C00h
and never comes within twenty kilobytes of them.  Both boot paths were
re-checked afterwards, floppy and hard disk, because BOOT2.BIN embeds
FATLOAD and therefore changed with them.

v0.22 - THE VDM IS WIRED INTO COMMAND.COM (2026-08-08)
------------------------------------------------------
Typing the name of a 16-bit program at the prompt now runs it.  Until
today the VDM_TEST self-test was the only way in; the DOS box existed
but nothing could ask for one.

THE FORK IS IN 4Bh, NOT IN THE SHELL, and that is the whole design.
COMMAND.COM was not taught anything about 16-bit programs - it asks
for HELLO.COM exactly as it asks for MEM.EXE, and the kernel decides.
exec_kind opens the file, reads the first eight bytes (four before
0.29, which put a 16-bit jump in front of the magic), and answers
EK_D32 or EK_16BIT; a D32 image goes the path it always did, anything
else goes to vdm_exec.  Putting the decision in the shell would have
meant every other program that ever calls 4Bh - a batch file, an
installer, INSTALL= later - having to make the same decision again,
and getting it wrong differently.  THE EXTENSION DECIDES NOTHING.
The one change in COMMAND.COM is a pointer to its environment in the
EXEC parameter block, which had been a documented "(ignored)" field.

THE 16-BIT PATH RETURNS, and that is why it is a tenth of the size of
the 32-bit one.  A D32 EXEC has to park the occupant of the transient
slot, count depth, switch to the kernel stack and never come back
(the child's 4Ch unwinds into the parent's frame).  A DOS box lives
below 1MB, so it disturbs nothing above it: the caller stands exactly
where it was, vdm_exec returns, and there is nothing to put back.  A
16-bit program does not count against EXEC_MAX either.

exec_kind ANSWERS WITH A VALUE, NOT A FLAG, and the reason is worth
keeping: the natural test - CMP against the signature - sets the carry
flag on its own account, so a "could not open the file" answer riding
in CF would be forged by any 16-bit program whose bytes at the magic's
offset sort below D32_MAGIC.  A file that will not open is deliberately NOT
reported by exec_kind at all; it goes down the D32 path, which is the
one that knows how to say "no such program".  That also stops COMMAND
trying four extensions in turn from building and tearing down three
DOS boxes before it finds the right one.

WHAT A PROGRAM IS HANDED, all of which only exists once a shell is
doing the starting:

  THE COMMAND TAIL, copied into PSP+80h from the same buffer 4Bh
  already copies for the 32-bit side.

  THE TWO FCBs at 5Ch and 6Ch, parsed out of that tail, and the two
  result codes in AX at entry: FFh if the argument named a drive that
  does not exist, 01h if it holds a wildcard, 00h otherwise.  This is
  furniture from 1981 that programs still read.  SIXTEEN BYTES EACH,
  NOT THE THIRTY-SEVEN AN OPEN FCB OCCUPIES - the two in a PSP are
  sixteen apart and the second ends four bytes short of the tail, so
  zeroing a whole FCB would wipe the tail it was parsed from.

  THE ENVIRONMENT, as a block of its own below 1MB: the shell's
  strings copied in, an empty string to end them, a word 0001h, and
  the program's own fully-qualified path.  That last is where argv[0]
  comes from in every C runtime of the era.  It goes through truename
  (21h/7160h) rather than being copied as typed, so "ARGS" at the
  prompt arrives as C:\ARGS.COM.  The block is ALLOCATED BEFORE THE
  PROGRAM'S OWN, and the order is not arbitrary: a .COM is handed
  every free paragraph there is, so anything allocated after it would
  find nothing left.  Ownership is handed to the PSP once there is
  one, so the exit sweep takes both with one call.

  THE DTA, set to PSP+80h as DOS does.  Without this a guest's
  directory searches would fill the DTA of whoever started it - which
  is COMMAND.COM, possibly in the middle of a FOR loop.

^C AND ABORT BOTH ARRIVE AS 32-BIT CODE INSIDE A CALL THE GUEST MADE,
and neither has a sensible value to return.  ctrl_break raises INT 23h
and COMMAND's handler issues 4Ch; an Abort at the critical-error
prompt does the same.  Both are several frames above the monitor, in
the middle of k21.  So fn4C checks whether a VM is running and, if it
is, longjmps: vdm_abort puts the kernel stack back to what it was when
vdm_run started and falls into the ordinary exit path, which closes
the guest's handles and gives its memory back exactly as a 4Ch would.
It is the same manoeuvre COMMAND makes with cmd_gohome and for the
same reason - the thing being abandoned is not the caller of that
code, it is the code itself.  WITHOUT IT, ANSWERING ABORT WOULD HAVE
TERMINATED THE SHELL, which is merely waiting in its EXEC call, and
taken AUTOEXEC.BAT round again.  f4C_vdm clears crit_busy first, for
the reason cmd_gohome does: a longjmp out of a critical-error handler
carries the kernel's "a handler is running" lock away with it, after
which every critical error quietly answers itself.

The VM flag is cleared FIRST in the exit path, before the handle
sweep.  The sweep flushes the guest's files, a flush can raise a
critical error, and Abort at that prompt comes back to the same exit
path - which with the flag still set is a loop rather than an exit.

TWO MORE CALLS JOINED THE INTERCEPTED LIST: 51h, which is 62h under
its undocumented name and would otherwise have handed a guest the
32-bit PSP address; and 50h, which sets the current PSP.  50h moves
what 51h and 62h answer AND NOTHING ELSE - the block the VM gives back
at the end is the one it was given, so a TSR swapping PSPs cannot make
the cleanup free somebody else's memory.

A LEAK AND A BUG FOUND WHILE RESTRUCTURING THE FAILURE PATHS: the
.COM loader's out-of-memory exit returned without closing the file it
had open, which mattered little when the self-test was the only caller
and matters a great deal when COMMAND tries four extensions for every
command typed.  Every failure exit now goes through one place that
closes the file and gives back both allocations.

STILL MISSING, and worth being honest about: a guest that hooks INT
23h does not get to see the ^C.  Real DOS would run its handler and
carry the interrupted call on if it returned, which means running V86
code from inside a kernel call the guest is already inside - the
monitor has no way to nest that yet.  Same for a guest's own INT 24h
handler.  Nesting a VM inside a VM is still refused at the guest's
4Bh, so a 16-bit program cannot yet start another one.

The proof is TOOLS\ARGS.ASM and DISK\VDMTEST.BAT.  ARGS prints its
tail, its FCBs, its entry AX, its environment and its own path, and
exits with an ERRORLEVEL taken from its tail so a batch file can
prove exit codes come back through EXEC; /W waits for a key so there
is something for ^C to interrupt, and /B touches a drive that is not
there so there is something to answer Abort to.  Verified on DOSBox
floppy and 86Box FAT16/ATA: tail and FCBs (including AX=FF01 for a
bad drive and a wildcard), the environment with COMSPEC/PROMPT and
the truename path, ERRORLEVEL 3, a guest redirected into a file, a
guest piped into SORT, ^C killing only the DOS box, Abort killing
only the DOS box, and MEM reading 587K free before and after - the
same number, so nothing leaks.

v0.32b - THE NULL GUARD'S FIRST FIRING WAS A FALSE POSITIVE
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Second hardware session, same day.  C: mounted and the disk work of
v0.32 held up; then QCONFIG.EXE from PC DOS died with

    CPU exception 01 at 001237EF err 00000000
    Write through a null pointer.

and that address is 0x137EF into the kernel, which the link map puts
five bytes past the top of vdm_setvec - i.e. the instruction after
`mov dword ptr ds:[eax],edx`, a data breakpoint being a trap and
reported after the store.  So: 21h/25h, from a guest, hooking a low
vector.  QCONFIG hooks INT 0 before it divides, which is what every
CPU prober has always done.

THE GUARD WATCHES LINEAR 0 TO 15 AND LINEAR 0 TO 15 IS IVT ENTRIES
0-3.  That is not an oversight, it is the consequence of the guard not
being a page - page zero is load-bearing here, NULLTRAP.INC argues it
at length - so a program hooking INT 0/1/2/3 and a program storing
through a null pointer are the same event to the hardware.  v0.31
half-knew it: v86_run disarms, which covers a guest writing the table
with its own MOV.  It does not cover the guest ASKING DOS to write it,
because 21h/25h is served by the kernel with the guard armed.  DPMI's
0201h had the identical hole.  Both now go through ivt_set, which
stands the guard down across the store and puts it back.

WORTH SAYING PLAINLY: THIS WAS THE FIRST TIME THE GUARD EVER FIRED.
No emulator implements data breakpoints, so v0.31 shipped a feature
that could not be exercised and v0.32 could not have found this
either.  The mechanism works - that is now proven on iron - and the
first thing it caught was a program doing nothing wrong.

TWO THINGS ADDED TO THE FAULT RECOVERY, both of them state that
outlives the program that owned it:
  - THE GUARD IS RE-ARMED.  v86_run, the thunk and now ivt_set all
    disarm and re-arm on the way out, and a fault takes the way out
    away - so one recovered crash inside a DOS box used to turn the
    null guard off for the rest of the session, silently.
  - THE CONSOLE GOES BACK TO COOKED.  4401h sets bit 5 on the SFT and
    the SFT for handle 0 belongs to the SHELL, not to the program that
    borrowed it, so a full-screen program killed between "raw on" and
    "raw off" leaves COMMAND.COM reading unedited single characters
    for ever.  The stated point of this recovery is to buy back a
    usable prompt and a console nobody can type at is not one.  This
    is a candidate explanation for the "Bad command or filename"
    cascade Charlie saw after the crash, and it is only a candidate.

APITEST grew two checks: 25h/35h on vector 0, and that the guard is
ARMED AGAIN afterwards - the second one matters more, because a missed
re-arm disables the null guard with no symptom at all.  Note what it
cannot do: on an emulator the guard would not have fired before the
fix either, so the test proves the bookkeeping and only iron proves
the behaviour.

STILL OPEN FROM THAT SESSION, NOT DIAGNOSED:
  - [DIAGNOSED AND FIXED 2026-08-12 - see "THE 52h POINTER" below.  It
    was the MCB walk, and the guess above was right about the symptom
    and wrong about the cause: the arena is fine and the walk never
    started in it.]  Quarterdeck Manifest (MFT.EXE) freezes at its
    splash screen.  No exception, so this is a loop or a wait rather
    than a fault.
  - The repeated "Bad command or filename" after the QCONFIG crash,
    and IMAGE.EXE apparently re-running.  dos_fault clears vdm_busy,
    vdm_depth, the DPMI flags, crit_busy and INDOS and leaves
    exec_depth alone precisely so 4Ch returns to the waiting shell
    rather than restarting it, so the shell should NOT have reloaded.
    That it looked like it did is unexplained and wants watching on
    the next run now that the crash itself is gone.

AFTER v0.32 - TWO MORE THE 486 FOUND (2026-08-12)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The same session that passed QCONFIG, the Dobson Utilities and the
whole floppy test suite also produced two failures, and they turned
out to be one lesson repeated: THE BRIDGE IS WHERE THE BUGS ARE, and
the 32-bit side cannot see them because it never makes the call a
16-bit program makes.

THE 52h POINTER, which is what froze Manifest.  vdm_dos special-cases
the calls it cannot pass through and hands everything else to k21, and
52h was not on the list - so a guest got fn52's answer, which is a
FLAT pointer to dos_lol somewhere above 1MB.  vdm_result writes back
the bottom sixteen bits of EBX and does not touch ES, so the program
ended up holding a stale ES and half a kernel address, read its
first-MCB segment out of whatever that pointed at, and walked 'M'
blocks from a random segment looking for a 'Z' it would never meet.
Nothing faults, because every byte of that is mapped: it wraps the
20-bit address space until the power switch.  A hang with no exception
behind it, exactly as reported.

The fix is a real-mode-shaped list of lists, below 1MB where a guest
can point at it, built once at boot by vdm_lolinit and handed out by
vdm_lol.  The layout is in PMDOS.INC as GLOL_*.  Two things about it
are deliberate.  FIRST, the first-MCB word says V86_TPA_SEG and not
ARENA_BASE: those are two different arenas, the kernel's 32-bit one
and the conventional one a DOS box lives in, and handing a guest the
kernel's answer was the bug in miniature.  SECOND, the pointers to
structures PM-DOS does not have - DPB, SFT, CDS, the FCB table - say
FFFF:FFFF, which is DOS's own "the chain ends here", and NOT a
plausible-looking address.  Inventing structures there would be worse
than refusing, because a tool would follow them.  The device chain is
the exception and gets one real terminated NUL header, because
PM-DOS has had genuine devices since v0.30.

WHY IT SURVIVED TO v0.32: MEM.EXE walks the arena correctly and always
has, because MEM is a D32 program that takes the 32-bit path.  Our own
tool exercised the structure and proved nothing whatever about the
call a 16-bit tool makes.  Same shape as the MKDISK spc lesson - the
test could not reach it.

THE FLAGS A GUEST READS BACK, which is what Windows for Workgroups
3.11 was complaining about when it said it needed an 80386.  V86_UFLAGS
keeps IOPL and NT out of the flags a guest RUNS under, and that part
was right and stays right: NT turns IRET into a task switch.  But the
same mask was applied to the flags a guest is SHOWN, by vf_pushf, by
v86_reflect, by v86_leave and by v86_setflags - and every 286-versus-386
test ever written works by setting bits 12 to 14 with POPF and reading
them back with PUSHF.  They read back zero, so a 486 in a DOS box
reported itself as a 286.

Not owning a flag and not seeing it are different things.  IOPL and NT
are now virtualised the way IF already was, in v86_vpriv: captured on
POPF and IRET, folded into every flags image the guest is shown, never
once written to the flags the CPU runs on.  Note the two shadows are
not the same kind of thing - IF is virtual because the monitor must
ACT on it, IOPL and NT are virtual only because a program expects to
read back what it wrote, which costs one dword and buys every CPU
detector in DOS.

The ring-3 DPMI path needs none of this and did not get it: PUSHF and
POPF are not IOPL-sensitive in protected mode, so a client executes
them for real and reads the real EFLAGS.

LOLTEST.COM covers both, and its arena walk is BOUNDED - it counts
blocks and reports "NEVER TERMINATED" rather than hanging the way the
bug did, because a hang is the one result a test cannot report.  The
GLOL_ offsets are a published layout that software compiled in 1989
expects, so PMDOS.INC now asserts them at assembly time; the assertions
were confirmed to fire by breaking one on purpose.

AND THEN THE REST OF THE CALLS THAT ANSWER AN ADDRESS, because 52h
turned out not to be a special case but the FIRST case.  Every INT 21h
function that hands back a pointer has the same problem, and the
kernel had three more of them waiting to be written: 1Bh and 1Ch
(allocation info, DS:BX -> the media descriptor byte) and 63h (the
DBCS table, DS:SI -> it).  All three now keep what they point at
inside the guest block and answer its flat address, and one bridge
handler - vdm_dsptr - splits that into a segment and an offset for
whichever register the call uses.  Written together on purpose: three
handlers that each invented their own answer is how the 52h bug got
in.  Note they move DS and not ES, which is what DOS did and why
programs push DS around them.

Four more went in at the same time because they were cheap and on the
list: 38h country information (one country, the United States,
answered honestly rather than a fiction for every other), 5Ch record
locking and 67h set handle count (both succeed, and neither is a lie -
there is no second process to lock against and no per-process handle
table to grow), and the interim-console half of 63h.

38h needed a bridge case of its own for a reason worth remembering:
DS:DX is a buffer EXCEPT when DX is FFFFh, which means "set" and is a
sentinel.  A blanket P_DX in vdm_ptrtab would have flattened the
sentinel into DS*16+FFFF - an ordinary address, no longer FFFFh - so
the kernel would have taken a set for a get and written 34 bytes over
the end of the guest's segment.  Exactly the trap vdm_subptr's comment
already describes for 71h/47h.

6Ch AND 65h FINISHED THE ITEM.  6Ch is an entry point rather than an
implementation: 716Ch was written first for the LFN API and takes its
arguments in exactly the registers the classic call uses, so 6Ch
validates AL and jumps into it.  What it buys is the one thing 3Dh
and 3Ch cannot say between them - open-or-create as a single decision,
with "which did you do" in CX.

65h is answered in halves and the split is deliberate; see the roadmap
item for which five subfunctions are refused and why.  Its bridge case
exists because 65h is the clearest example yet of a function whose
SUBFUNCTIONS disagree about which register holds an address: 01h takes
ES:DI, 21h and 22h take DS:DX, and 20h and 23h take a character in DL
and no pointer at all.  One flag byte keyed on AH has to be wrong for
at least two of those, and wrong here means handing the kernel an
offset with no segment, or turning the letter 'y' into an address.

AND RAISING I21_MAXFN TOUCHES TWO TABLES.  6Ch is past where the
dispatch table used to stop, and the same constant bounds i21_table
AND vdm_ptrtab - so raising it without lengthening both makes the
short one read past its end and use what follows as a handler address
or as pointer flags.  That is the bug already written up above
vdm_ptrtab, from the other direction, and it now cannot recur: both
tables assert their own length against I21_MAXFN at assembly time,
and both assertions were confirmed to fire by raising the constant on
purpose.

NOT VERIFIED ON HARDWARE YET.  All of it assembles and the kernel
builds; none of it has been run.  Manifest and WfW are the tests for
the first two, LOLTEST for the rest, and they are on Charlie's 486,
not here.

AND THE FLAGS FIX DOES NOT MAKE WINDOWS RUN.  It gets WfW 3.11 past
the CPU check and no further: 3.11 is enhanced-mode only, so WIN.COM
goes on to WIN386.EXE, which must either own the machine or find a
VCPI server, and PM-DOS is neither.  That is the INT 2Fh AX=1605h
handoff, which is still not implemented - only 1686h/1687h are.  The
flags fix is worth having on its own merits, because it was misleading
every CPU detector in the box; it is not a step towards booting
Windows.

v0.32 - WHAT REAL HARDWARE SAID (2026-08-11)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The first release written from a real machine's evidence rather than
an emulator's.  Charlie wrote the floppy image to a disk, booted a
486, and came back with two things - "I cannot switch to C:, it says
invalid media" and "the floppy light never goes out".  Both were real,
neither was reproducible here, and the reason they were not is the
same reason in both cases: THE TESTS COULD NOT REACH THEM.

CLUSTERS BIGGER THAN 8K.  fat_mount refuses a volume whose cluster
does not fit clus_buf, and clus_buf was 8192 bytes - so 16 sectors per
cluster was the ceiling, and anything above it was rejected as
"invalid media type", which reads as a damaged disk rather than as a
limit of ours.  MS-DOS 6.22 formats an 850MB drive with 16K clusters,
because 850MB over FAT16's 65524-cluster limit leaves no smaller
choice, so PM-DOS called a perfectly good C: unformatted.  Every
volume above about 512MB was unreadable and no test disk here was
anywhere near it: MKDISK hardcoded spc = 2, which capped it at about
67MB, so every image ever built had 1K clusters.  CLUSBUF_SIZE is now
32768 - 64 sectors, which is the largest cluster MS-DOS itself can
produce - and the kernel grew 24K for it.

THE SAME 8K, TWICE, AND THE SECOND ONE WAS WORSE.  Fixing the mount
exposed a second buffer with the same story.  IORM's load_dos stages
each cluster of PMDOS.SYS through XFER_BUF, which is XFER_SIZE - 8K -
and read fl_spc sectors into it without capping.  A 16K cluster
overran it by 8K into the memory above, so the kernel was written over
WHILE IT WAS BEING LOADED and started on a corrupt image: exception 0E
at DOS_BASE+15, every time, before a single line of the kernel ran.
The cluster is now moved in XFER_SIZE pieces, which is the rule
bio_loop in BLOCK.INC already followed.  This one predates the mount
fix and was hidden behind it - a disk with big clusters could not be
mounted, so nobody found out it could not be booted from either.

THE FLOPPY MOTOR, WHICH WAS NEVER COSMETIC.  This sat in the trap list
for eleven releases as "the 40:40 countdown only ticks during our
real-mode excursions, so the motor stays on; cosmetic, fix someday by
ticking it from IRQ0".  It is not cosmetic on iron - it is a motor and
a loaded head left running against real media until the machine is
switched off - and "someday" arrived the first time anybody watched a
real drive light.  The deeper point is that OWNING IRQ 0 MEANS OWNING
EVERYTHING THE BIOS TIMER TICK DID, and the motor was only half of it:

  40:6C, THE BIOS TICK COUNT, WAS FROZEN.  The kernel kept a private
  counter and left the BDA's alone, so every real-mode program that
  times something by reading 40:6C directly - which is most of them,
  being cheaper than INT 1Ah - saw a clock that had stopped.  A delay
  loop written that way does not run slow, it never finishes.  Nobody
  had hit it because nothing in the test set delays that way.

irq_timer now does both, and the tick count lives in the BDA ONLY:
tick_count is gone and IOS_TICKS reads 40:6C, so there is one clock
and a DOS box and the kernel cannot disagree about it.  Confirmed by
accident and conclusively - APITEST's 5Ah seed came back 0010F0B4,
which is 1,110,196 ticks, which is 16:56 since midnight, which is what
the host clock said.  Before the change that number counted from boot.

WHAT MKDISK LEARNED, WHICH IS THE POINT.  The tool that builds the
test disks could not build a disk that reaches the kernel's own
limits, so having tests proved nothing about them.  It now picks
sectors per cluster from the volume size the way FORMAT does, takes
sizes up to FAT16's real 2048MB ceiling instead of 500, and has -spc
to force a cluster size outright.  That last one matters most: FAT16
needs only 4085 clusters, so "-hd16 80 -spc 32" gives 16K clusters in
80MB, and the ceiling is now testable at a size the emulators are
happy with rather than needing an 850MB image the BIOS chokes on.
BIN\HDBIG.IMG is that disk, and it boots, DIRs and passes all twelve
APITEST checks.

A LIMIT NO TEST CAN REACH IS NOT COVERED BY HAVING TESTS.  Three
separate bugs here, all of them a fixed buffer sized for the only
clusters anybody had ever made, and all of them invisible because the
tool that makes the disks had the same assumption baked in.  When a
constant bounds what the system will accept, something in the test set
has to sit on the far side of it.

v0.31 - THE SECOND FOUNDATION PASS (2026-08-10)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The other half of the audit v0.30 started, and again not a feature
release.  Five things, and the DOS version PM-DOS answers to.

THE TARGET IS NOW MS-DOS 6.22.  21h/30h said 5.00 and 21h/3306h said
"0.30", on the reasoning that 30h is the one programs test and 3306h
is where the truth belongs.  That was the wrong reading of 3306h: it
reports the version SETVER is lying ABOUT, which is still a DOS
version, and a program that finds 6.22 at one call and 0.30 at the
other has not found the truth - it has found a system contradicting
itself, and refusing to run is a reasonable thing for it to do.  Both
now say 6.22, and PM-DOS's own build number lives at 21h/F100h where
nothing can mistake it for a DOS version.  VER reports THAT and only
that: it is the system's version and the system is PM-DOS.  It printed
both numbers for about an hour and they were taken out again, because
two versions side by side read as two halves of one answer when they
are answers to different questions - anything wanting the 30h number
asks 30h.
6.22 because it is the last MS-DOS that was only DOS - 7.x is Windows
95's - so it is the high-water mark of the API this kernel is trying
to be.

1. IOCTL WAS ONE SUBFUNCTION DEEP.
21h/44h answered AL=0 and returned "invalid function" for everything
else, and of all the gaps left after v0.30 this was the one whose
FAILURE MODE was worst.  A program that asks 4401h to put the console
in raw mode and is refused does not stop - it carries on with a
console that is still cooked, and every key it reads afterwards has
been line-edited and echoed behind its back.  The bug presents as "the
keyboard behaves oddly in this one program", which is a long way from
"IOCTL subfunction 01h is missing".

Added: 00h and 01h (device information, and raw mode, which 3Fh on CON
now genuinely honours - no echo, no editing, no ^C, and extended keys
delivered as the zero-plus-scan-code pair DOS reports), 06h and 07h
(input and output status - on a file 06h means "not at the end yet",
which is how a filter asks whether its input has run out without
consuming a byte to find out), 08h and 09h (removable and remote), 0Bh
(sharing retry count, accepted and discarded) and 0Eh (logical drive
map).  Still refused: 02h-05h and 0Ch/0Dh, the generic IOCTL pairs,
which pass a driver-defined packet to a driver PM-DOS does not have -
"invalid function" is the truth there rather than a gap.

08h is decided by the BIOS drive number, so two volumes on one disk
give the same answer because they are on the same physical thing.
APITEST prints it, and it says "removable" booted off the floppy in
DOSBox and "fixed" booted off the ATA disk in 86Box, which is the
whole call working.

2. 5Bh CREATE-NEW, AND 5Ah THE TEMPORARY FILE.
5Bh is one flag on 3Ch and matters out of all proportion to that: it
is the only way to ask the file system to make a file but NOT if doing
so would destroy something, and it is what an archiver's "do not
overwrite" is built on.  A 5Bh that answers "invalid function" sends
every one of those programs down a fallback that calls 3Ch, and the
file is gone.

5Ah generates the name itself and appends it to the caller's buffer,
which is as much the answer as the handle is.  Uniqueness is by
TESTING rather than by hoping the clock is fine-grained enough: the
tick count seeds it, a counter moves it on, each candidate is searched
for before it is created, and the loop is bounded at 64 so it cannot
become a hang.

3. INT 28h IS ISSUED, AND REACHES REAL-MODE CODE.
DOS issues INT 28h while it waits for the keyboard, and it is the only
moment at which a resident program may call DOS back - everywhere else
the DOS it would be calling is already inside a call of its own.  PRINT
spooling in the background is the canonical use and the reason the
hook exists.  PM-DOS never issued one, because the wait was PMIO's:
IOS_CONIN blocks on a HLT inside the keyboard driver, which is right
for a driver and leaves no room for anything to happen in between.

Every DOS path that waits for a key now goes through dos_conin, which
polls IOS_CONSTAT and idles.  WHOSE INT 28h is the interesting half.
The handler a TSR installs is real-mode code reachable only in V86, so
this can only be issued while a DOS box is running - and it is only
issued then.  A native 32-bit program waiting at the prompt idles
without it, because a 32-bit program cannot go resident here and the
call would be to an empty room.

Getting there is an excursion down into V86 and back, and rather than
write a second one it borrows dpmi_simint - the same "park the
context, fill vdm_ctx, plant an INT instruction, jump into vdm_loop,
come back when it IRETs onto a HLT" trick 21h/0300h uses.  The
registers handed to the handler are the GUEST'S OWN, copied out of its
parked context rather than zeroed: INT 28h on a real DOS is an
interrupt taken while the program was in the middle of something, so
the handler sees a plausible DS, and handing it zeroes would be
handing it a machine state no real DOS produces.

IDLETEST measures it: hook INT 28h, wait for a key, count the calls.
53,105 on DOSBox and 57,674 on 86Box across a few seconds of waiting,
with a register signature intact across the wait - which is the half
that could have gone wrong, since each of those is a full excursion
running on the guest's own stack and returning to a program still
sitting inside its INT 21h.

A TSR loaded in one box and popped up from ANOTHER is the real goal
and this is a step towards it, not the whole of it.  The rest is INT 9
and belongs with the ring-3 work.

4. THE CHEAP ONES, WHICH WERE ONLY CHEAP BECAUSE v0.30 HAPPENED.
03h, 04h and 05h - AUX and PRN a byte at a time - are dev_in and
dev_out with the device chosen by the function number instead of by a
name, and they exist because v0.30 built the device table.  They do
not go through the standard handles on purpose: 02h writes to handle 1
and can be redirected, 05h writes to the printer and cannot, which is
exactly why a program that means the printer uses 05h.

60h TRUENAME is the resolver's own answer handed back instead of used.
resolve_core already leaves the whole path in rp_names as 8.3
components with '.' and '..' collapsed and a relative path seeded from
the current directory, so the work was a drive letter, a backslash,
and factoring PATH.INC's 47h renderer into names_string.

68h and 6Ah (the same call under its DOS 3.3 and DOS 4 names) are
sft_close minus the closing, which is why they are one routine with a
flag - two copies of "write the directory entry back" would be two
places for the 57h stamp rule to be got wrong.  A program that calls
this has decided its data matters more than its speed, and the
fallback when it fails is closing and reopening the file, which costs
a directory search and loses the file position.

2Eh and 54h, the verify flag, are set and reported and DELIBERATELY
NOT ACTED ON, which is worth saying out loud rather than quietly
doing.  Verification belongs in the block layer and doubles the cost
of every write when it is on.  The calls exist anyway because of what
a program does without them: VERIFY is a global setting anything may
read and almost anything may set, and 54h answering "invalid function"
claims the DOS underneath is broken, which is a much larger claim than
"writes are not verified".

5. THE NULL-POINTER GUARD - AND WHY IT IS NOT A PAGE.
The v0.30 roadmap said this would be one page-table entry: mark linear
0-0FFFh not present and every null dereference becomes a page fault
with CR2 naming the offset.  THAT CANNOT BE DONE HERE, and the reason
is the shape of the system rather than an implementation detail.

Page zero is not empty in PM-DOS.  It holds the real-mode interrupt
vector table, which every guest reads and writes; the BIOS data area,
which v0.27 made the AUTHORITY for console geometry and the display
page; the critical-error flag; InDOS at 4F7h, incremented by the third
instruction of int21_entry on EVERY DOS call; and RMFRAME at 500h,
the register frame every real-mode thunk marshals through.  Unmapping
it faults on the next DOS call the kernel makes and on the next timer
interrupt, and it cannot be worked around by mapping it back on kernel
entry - that is a CR3 reload and a TLB flush per INT 21h and per IRQ,
to protect a range the kernel is obliged to keep using.  InDOS in
particular cannot move: 34h hands out its ADDRESS and the TSR that
asks holds a real-mode far pointer, so it lives under 1MB by contract.

The flat identity map is what makes those five things work and the
whole first page is load-bearing.  A program gets a guard page at zero
when it stops sharing an address space with DOS's low memory, which is
the ring-3 release - where a native program runs out of its own LDT
with a non-zero base and gets this for free.

So: four debug registers instead, DR0-DR3 watching linear 0, 4, 8 and
12 for four-byte WRITES.  Sixteen bytes rather than four thousand, and
worth being exact about.  Caught: *(int *)0 = x, a store through a
null struct pointer to any of its first four dwords - which between
them are most real null-pointer bugs, because the field written first
is usually near the front - and memset(NULL, 0, n), which begins at
offset zero.  Missed: a write further into a large structure, and any
READ through a null pointer.  The cost is nothing: no address-space
change, no TLB flush, no per-call work, and the registers were unused.

Armed globally (G0-G3, not L0-L3) because there are no tasks to switch
it between, and the two excursions that must not have it armed disarm
explicitly: v86_run, because linear 0-15 is the guest's vectors 0 to 3
and a 16-bit program hooking divide-by-zero writes them as a matter of
course, and rm_int, because BIOS code called through the thunk is not
ours to police.  CONFIG.SYS NULLTRAP=OFF turns it off for the program
that writes low memory on purpose.

IT IS NOT VERIFIED, AND THAT IS THE HONEST STATE.  Neither emulator
implements data breakpoints.  CRASH /N writes through a null pointer
and survives on both, so 21h/F107h was added to report the guard's
state AND read DR7 back out of the CPU - which is what separates "we
never armed it" from "the CPU ignored us".  It reads back DDDD06AA on
both, exactly as written, with the addresses in DR0-DR3.  The kernel
side is right; whether the hardware acts on it is the first thing to
check on real iron, and the second emulator agreeing proves nothing
here because both are missing the same feature.

AND ONE BUG THE WORK FOUND, which is why 60h was worth writing:
".." AT THE ROOT WAS AN ERROR.  resolve_core refused to go above the
root, on the reasoning that there is nothing up there - true, and not
what DOS does.  "CD .." in the root of a real DOS quietly stays, and
"DIR ..\" lists the root.  It matters beyond tidiness because a path
assembled by a program - a base plus "..\..\x" - routinely walks up
more levels than it walks down, and every one of those failed here.
It clamps now.  Found by 21h/60h, the first call in PM-DOS whose whole
job is to canonicalise a path the caller made up, which is exactly the
kind of bug a new caller shakes out of old code.

v0.30 - THE FOUNDATION PASS (2026-08-10)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Not a feature release.  An audit of what a DOS has to be able to do
before more is built on top of it turned up four things, and this is
those four things and nothing else.

1. THERE WAS ONLY ONE DEVICE, AND IT WAS CON.
The whole of the device namespace was is_con: four bytes compared
against "con",0.  Every other reserved name - NUL, PRN, AUX, LPT1 -
fell through to the file path, which means

    A:\>VER > NUL
    A:\>DIR NUL
    NUL                       25  08-10-2026  14:38

"> NUL" is the commonest line in DOS batch programming and PM-DOS was
writing a 25-byte file for it, in whatever directory the batch file
happened to run from.

A device is now a name in one table (dev_tab: CON, NUL, PRN, LPT1-3,
AUX, COM1-4) and an id of KIND plus UNIT, so LPT2 is the same driver
as LPT1 with a different port.  dev_find takes the LAST PATH
COMPONENT and stops at the dot, because that is DOS's actual rule -
"NUL", "C:\TEMP\NUL" and "NUL.TXT" are all the bit bucket, while
CONFIG.NUL is an ordinary file.  Writes go through dev_out (screen /
discard / INT 17h / INT 14h) and reads through dev_in, where NUL and
the printer are an immediate end of file.

THE LOOKUP HAD TO GO EVERYWHERE A PATH IS TAKEN, not just at open:
delete, rename, mkdir, rmdir and the attribute calls all refuse now,
or the file system gets a second chance to invent an entry with a
reserved name that nothing can afterwards open.  ERR_ACCESS for the
calls that would modify the name and ERR_NOFILE for the ones that
merely look it up, which is what MS-DOS answers.

THE SERIAL PORT DELIBERATELY DOES NOT BLOCK.  A DOS box waiting
forever on a COM port with nothing attached is indistinguishable from
a hung kernel and there is no way out of it from the keyboard, so a
port with no byte ready reads as end of file.

2. 21h/34h - THE InDOS FLAG.
PM-DOS has been able to make a program resident since v0.25 and had no
way for it to ask whether calling DOS was safe, which is claiming half
a thing.  The flag lives at 4F7h in the BIOS data area rather than in
the kernel's data, and that is forced: 34h hands out an ADDRESS, the
program that wants it is usually a 16-bit TSR, and a real-mode far
pointer cannot reach above 1MB.  The critical-error flag is at 4F6h,
one byte BELOW it, because a great deal of TSR code finds that one by
subtracting one from what 34h returned rather than by calling 5D06h.

IT COUNTS RATHER THAN FLAGS, because these calls genuinely nest - a
critical-error handler and an INT 23h handler both run with their
caller's INT 21h still open.  The interesting part is the two places
the count would otherwise DRIFT, and both are EXEC: a 4Bh that starts
a child never returns, so its own increment is still standing while
the child runs, and without help every program would run with InDOS
reading 1 and no TSR would ever pop up.  The 32-bit path saves the
depth in the nesting record and zeroes it; the DOS box does the same
in vdm_run and puts it back in vdm_done.  Every unwind anchor -
shell_restart, vdm_abort, dpmi_exit, dpmi_fault - asserts it rather
than adjusting it, because an unwind throws away frames whose
decrements will never run.

3. 21h/57h - GET AND SET A FILE'S DATE AND TIME, and 21h/59h - GET
EXTENDED ERROR.
57h is what every archiver, compiler and MAKE uses; without it an
extractor stamps everything with the wall clock and a build tool
rebuilds the world.  The stamp rides in the handle (SFT_TIME/SFT_DATE,
loaded at open) rather than being read back out of the directory,
because the directory does not yet hold what the program just set -
the write-back happens at close, and SFTF_SETDT is what tells
sft_close to keep the program's stamp instead of using "now".  A set
also marks the handle DIRTY, or a read-only handle would have nothing
else to write back and the close would decide there was nothing to do.

59h is what a program calls the moment something fails, and PM-DOS
answered "invalid function" - so every caller learned nothing from a
failure except that there had been one.  The code is whatever
i21_fail last recorded, which is the one place every failure in the
kernel passes through; the class, action and locus are a TRANSLATION
of that code rather than a second thing to keep in step, so they can
never disagree with it.  It is not cleared by a successful call,
exactly as in real DOS: 59h is only ever asked immediately after a
failure, and clearing on success would mean every intervening
housekeeping call wiped the answer.

4. A RING-0 FAULT NO LONGER ENDS THE MACHINE.
A native 32-bit program runs in the kernel's own code segment at ring
0, so a bug in one and a bug in the kernel arrived at the same handler
- which printed the fault and HLTed.  A 16-bit guest has been
recoverable since the VDM existed and a DPMI client since v0.28; the
least protected thing in PM-DOS was its own software.

PMIO now calls a hook the DOS side registers (IOS_EXCHOOK ->
dos_fault) after it has reported the fault.  The interesting decision
was what to unwind TO.  Jumping to shell_restart works and was the
first version, but it RELOADS the interpreter - which re-runs
AUTOEXEC.BAT and loses the batch file in progress, so a crash in one
utility restarts the session.  4Ch already knows how to hand a slot
back to the program waiting in its EXEC, and that program is the
shell.  So a faulting program now terminates the way any other
program terminates, with errorlevel 255, and the batch file it was
called from carries on to the next line.  A fault in the SHELL itself
has no waiting parent, and 4Ch does the right thing with that on its
own: exec_depth is zero, so it takes the f4C_shell path and reloads
after all.

A second fault before the first recovery completes halts for real
(exc_nested), because going round again would only do it faster.
IOS_EXCCLEAR re-arms it once the DOS side is safely back at a prompt.

WHAT THIS IS NOT.  It is not containment - the program was at ring 0
and could have scribbled on the kernel before it faulted - and it is
not a promise about the file system, because a fault inside the FAT
code can make the close that follows write nonsense.  It buys back the
prompt, which on a development machine is the whole cost of every
fault.  Ring 3 for native programs is the real fix and is a release of
its own.

TWO BUGS FELL OUT OF TESTING THE ABOVE, and both were worth the trip:

  - EVERY 3Ch RETURNED THE FILE'S TIMESTAMP AS ITS HANDLE.  Loading
    the new stamp through EAX in f3C_stamp clobbered the handle
    sft_new had just returned, four lines before it was stored into
    the frame - with the carry flag clear to say it had worked.
    Introduced by this release and caught by DEVTEST within an hour,
    which is the entire argument for writing the test before
    believing the code.
  - "CHOICE < NUL" HUNG FOREVER.  Not a device bug: a redirected
    stdin at its end reads as ^Z, which is correct and documented,
    and CHOICE looped asking for a key that was never coming.  It now
    takes /T's default, or the first of the list.  The same hang was
    always there behind "CHOICE < " any empty file, waiting for
    somebody to type it.

VERIFIED on both, DOSBox FAT12 floppy and 86Box FAT16 over real ATA:
DEVTEST 9/9 (InDOS address and a count back at zero, NUL opened,
written to, read as EOF, matched through its extension and refused
deletion, 59h answering 05 / 03 / 04 / 02 for that refusal, a stamp
surviving close and re-open, PRN opened and written), NULTEST (VER >
NUL discarding, DIR NUL saying File not found, DIR >> NUL, CHOICE <
NUL defaulting, CON and NUL.TXT both not found, CONFIG.NUL a real
file), CRASHTST (three faults in a row - #PF at F0000000 with CR2
right, #DE, #UD - each returning errorlevel 255 to a batch file that
kept running, then DIR and VER afterwards).  Regressions green:
REDTEST, VDMTEST (including DPMITEST's callbacks) and NESTTEST, the
last with identical free memory before and after.

The 86Box VM has lpt1_enabled = 0 and no serial ports, which turned
out to be the useful configuration: it proves the INT 17h and INT 14h
paths RETURN on a machine with no such hardware rather than hanging.

v0.29 - CALLED BACK, AND A WORD FOR THE WRONG MACHINE (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Two things that both amount to answering a caller who is not where
you are: real-mode callbacks, which let real-mode code call a
protected-mode client; and a 16-bit stub in every D32 executable, so
that a PM-DOS program run on a DOS that cannot load it says so
instead of crashing the machine.

REAL-MODE CALLBACKS - 0303h, 0304h, 0305h
-----------------------------------------
0303h is the interface running backwards.  Everything else in
DPMI.INC is a client asking the host for something; a callback is
real-mode code calling the CLIENT, and it is how a program that has
left real mode still hooks a real-mode interrupt, or hands a driver
an address to call it back on.

The address is a HLT, which by now is the only thing it could have
been: it is what the mode switch is, what a simulated interrupt
returns to, and what XMS has been since 0.23.  dpmi_init takes two
paragraphs of low memory and fills them with eight two-byte pads, F4
then CB - a HLT for the monitor to stop on and a RETF behind it.  The
RETF is not decoration.  If real-mode code calls a slot no client
owns - a stale address left by a program that has exited, which is
exactly what happens when a client dies with a vector still hooked -
the monitor steps over the HLT and the RETF returns the call as
though nothing had claimed it.

THE HARD HALF IS COMING BACK, not going out.  The specification says
a callback procedure ends with an IRET and gives it no other way to
finish, so the frame that IRET pops is the host's to build, and it is
built to land on two more bytes in that same paragraph: CD 31, an
INT 31h, reached at ring 3 through a code descriptor over the
paragraph.  So a callback leaves through a trap in real mode and
returns through a trap in protected mode, and the client needs no
privileged instruction at either end.  dpmi_int31 recognises it by
the CS the interrupt came from rather than by AX, because by then AX
belongs to the client and means nothing to us.

WHAT THE PROCEDURE IS GIVEN is exactly what the specification asks
for, which is less than it first looks: DS:ESI on the real-mode
stack, ES:EDI on the register structure the callback was allocated
with, and a stack of the host's to run on.  The host does NOT take
the far return address off the real-mode stack.  That reads like an
omission and is not - the example handler in the specification does
it itself, which is the entire reason DS:ESI is a stack pointer and
not something more convenient.  So CS:IP in the structure is where
the call went TO, and the procedure decides where real mode carries
on by writing where it came FROM.  Getting that backwards would have
worked for an interrupt-invoked callback and broken every FAR CALL
one, which is the sort of thing that stays undiscovered for a year.

THE RING-0 STACK IS THE TRAP HERE, and it is worth writing down
because nothing about it is visible at the call site.  A callback
fires from inside the V86 loop, which is itself running inside the
client's 0300h - so the parked INT 31h frame and dpmi_simint's saved
state are sitting on the DPMI ring-0 stack, and DPMI_KSTACK is the
TOP of that same stack.  Entering ring 3 with TSS_ESP0 back at the
top, which is what dpmi_toring3 does and is right for a mode switch,
would mean the first thing to interrupt the procedure - a DOS call,
or just the timer - started writing at the top and went straight
through both.  dpmi_docall sets TSS_ESP0 to the monitor's own ESP
instead, so re-entry stacks BELOW everything parked above it, and
that same value is what dpmi_cbret restores before it jumps back into
vdm_loop.

Eight callbacks may be allocated at once; one may be in flight.  The
second limit is the honest consequence of one callback stack and one
saved monitor frame, and a nested call is refused the same way an
unowned one is - through the RETF.  The stack itself is four
kilobytes out of the arena, taken at the first 0303h a machine ever
sees and then kept: a client that never uses a callback never pays
for it, and a second client reuses the first one's, which MEM
confirms by showing one in-use arena block and not one per client.

0305h comes with them, and its answer is nothing - zero bytes of
state, and both procedures are a bare RETF in that same paragraph.  A
conventional host has to offer it because putting a real CPU back
into real mode drops state a client cannot reach to save; here the
two modes are the same CPU at a different CPL and the switch is an
IRETD, so there is genuinely nothing to lose.  0306h, the raw mode
switch, stays refused: a client that wants to change mode itself
wants ring 0.

A 16-BIT STUB IN EVERY D32 EXECUTABLE
-------------------------------------
Run COMMAND.COM or MEM.EXE from this build on real MS-DOS and it now
prints "This program requires 32-bit DOS mode" and exits with
errorlevel 1.  Before, DOS loaded the 32-bit image at 100h and
executed the header.

The mechanism is the one every DOS extender used, arrived at from the
other end.  A D32 file has no MZ signature, and real DOS decides what
a program is by the first two bytes and not by the extension - so it
loads one as a .COM at 100h and jumps to byte zero, whether the file
is called .COM or .EXE.  Byte zero is therefore now a JMP SHORT over
the header, to a stub at a fixed 20h that says the sentence and
calls 4C01h.  Under PM-DOS the jump is never executed: the kernel
reads the header and enters at D32H_ENTRY, as it always did.

The magic moved to +4 to make room, which means a D32 binary from
before 0.29 is not one now, and that is the intended answer rather
than a cost - the kernel and its executables are one build, and a
stale COMMAND.COM that would have been loaded and RUN is better
refused.  exec_kind reads eight bytes instead of four.

THE STUB IS HAND-ENCODED, AND IT HAS TO BE.  It lives inside a USE32
segment, so any 16-bit instruction the assembler emitted there would
carry a 66h operand-size prefix - and in real mode that prefix means
the other thing.  "mov dx,imm16" would assemble as 66 BA and execute
as MOV EDX,imm32, swallowing the two bytes after it and running into
the message.  So D32_HEAD in PMDOS.INC writes the fourteen bytes out
with what they are beside them, and every field in it is a constant:
the header is a fixed 32 bytes, the stub always starts at 20h, and
these bytes are byte-identical in all nine D32 executables.

VERIFIED.  DOSBox 0.74 floppy and 86Box (Pentium II / 440BX / real
ATA, FAT16), both green on both: DPMITEST now twenty checks, the last
three being a callback allocated, put in the real-mode vector table
with 0201h, invoked by asking the host to run that interrupt with
0300h, and answering in protected mode - proving in one result that
the procedure was entered in PM, that what it wrote into the
structure reached real mode, and that it found the far return address
on the stack the host handed it, since otherwise nothing would have
come back at all.  Then the address freed with 0304h and 0305h asked.
DPMITEST run TWICE in one boot, both runs fully green, with MEM
showing one persistent 4K arena block rather than two.  DPMI=OFF
re-verified.  The standing suite unchanged - A20TEST 13/13, I13TEST,
CURTEST, EXECTST, VDMTEST, REDTEST (which is also the CHOICE, SORT
and MORE externals loading), LFNTEST - and MEM still 624K with 623K
free.  The stub verified under a DOS that is not ours: MEM.EXE,
SORT.COM and COMMAND.COM each printing the sentence and returning to
the prompt.

v0.28 - A DPMI 0.9 HOST (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
A DOS program can now ask to be put into protected mode and stay
there: descriptors, extended memory, DOS calls, real-mode excursions
and BIOS calls, all from ring 3.  DOS\DPMI.INC, and CONFIG.SYS gained
DPMI=ON|OFF.

PM-DOS IS AN ODD HOST, and the oddity is the good kind.  Every
conventional DPMI host implements the DOS bridge by switching the CPU
back to real mode, calling INT 21h, and switching forward again -
that is most of what one is.  Here DOS is ALREADY 32-bit
protected-mode code, so a client's INT 21h goes through the IDT into
the same k21 the DOS box bridge uses, and the only work is turning
selector:offset into a flat address.  Which is the same translation
the V86 bridge does, so it is the same table: vdm_flags answers "which
registers of this call are pointers" for a DOS box and for a DPMI
client alike.

THE MODE SWITCH IS A HLT.  A client finds the host with INT 2Fh
AX=1687h and FAR CALLs the entry point it gets back; that entry is a
byte in the callback paragraph XMS already uses.  The monitor stops on
it, the DOS side recognises the address, and instead of resuming the
guest it builds a descriptor table and IRETDs into ring 3.  The DOS
box does not go away - its real-mode context is parked, and the
client's 21h/4Ch ends the box the client was.  The callback block was
built as a table in v0.23 for exactly this, and the comment in XMS.INC
saying EMS and DPMI could claim entries turned out to be right.

IOPL STAYS AT 0, and that is the decision worth recording.  A client
could be given IOPL 3, and then CLI, STI, IN and OUT would simply
work.  But IOPL 3 in protected mode hands back every I/O port, and
among them are the three the A20 gate is reached through - which v0.24
was a whole release about taking away.  So the client runs at IOPL 0,
those six instructions fault, and pm3_fault in VM86.INC emulates them
through the same vio_in and vio_out a DOS box goes through.  The
interrupt flag is virtual for the same reason it is in V86: a program
must not be able to stop the machine's timer.

THE RING-0 STACK IS NOT OPTIONAL.  Anything that interrupts ring-3
code switches stacks through TSS_ESP0 - a DPMI call, a DOS call, and
the timer and keyboard IRQs, which arrive whether the client wants
them or not.  v86_run points ESP0 at its own frame for the length of
a DOS box, and by the time a client is running that is a stack
belonging to nobody, so the host has one of its own and sets it on
every entry to ring 3.

0300h BORROWS THE DOS BOX'S OWN LOOP.  A simulated real-mode
interrupt needs a full V86 excursion, and vdm_loop already knows how
to answer everything a real-mode program can ask.  So dpmi_simint
parks the client's context, fills vdm_ctx in from the client's
register structure, and JUMPS INTO vdm_loop; when the real-mode
handler IRETs onto a second planted HLT, vdm_halt recognises the
address and longjmps back.  A simulated INT 21h from a protected-mode
client is therefore served by the same code that serves it from a DOS
program, which is the entire point of the arrangement.

AND IT IS DELIVERED BY EXECUTING AN "INT" INSTRUCTION, not by reading
the vector table.  That was the one real design mistake here and it
cost an evening: the first version looked the vector up at 0:0 and
jumped there, which works for INT 10h and does not work for INT 21h -
the monitor TRAPS 21h, so PM-DOS has no reason to put an entry in the
table and does not, and the guest went off to execute the vector table
as code.  Patching the vector byte into a two-byte "INT xx" in the
callback paragraph sends every interrupt wherever it would have gone
for any DOS program: to the kernel if the monitor claims it, through
the guest's own table if it does not.

WHAT IS SERVED: 0000-0003 and 0006-000C (descriptors), 0100-0102 (DOS
memory, which hands back a segment AND a selector over the same
bytes), 0200/0201 (real-mode vectors), 0204/0205 (protected-mode
vectors), 0300 (simulate), 0400/0401, 0500-0503 (extended memory out
of the kernel's arena), 0600-0604 (locking, which succeeds by doing
nothing because nothing here is ever paged out).  INT 21h in full
through the translation bridge, and 10h-17h, 1Ah, 2Fh and 33h
reflected to real mode.

WHAT IS NOT, and is refused rather than half-done: real-mode callbacks
(0303h-0305h) - added in 0.29, see above; nested or
concurrent clients, because there is one LDT; and protection between
the client and the kernel, since every page is marked user for V86's
sake and a client that builds itself a descriptor over the kernel can
reach it.  Hosts without paging protection are all in that position;
it is written down here rather than implied.

TWO OLDER BUGS, one of them found the hard way.  The frame every INT
21h handler works through had to grow two slots for the caller's DS
and ES - an interrupt gate does not reload them, and from ring 3 they
are the client's own - and the first attempt pushed them BELOW the
frame pointer.  EXEC and the critical-error abort both return to a
waiting caller by restoring ESP from the frame it saved and leaving
through i21_return, so those two pushes were gone by then and the
pops at the far end took the general registers instead: a #GP with an
LDT selector in the error code, from a DOS box that had never heard of
DPMI.  They go on before the frame pointer now, where every one of
those paths preserves them.

VERIFIED, DOSBox and 86Box, floppy and two hard disks: DPMITEST's
seventeen checks, from "is there a host" through the mode switch, the
PE bit in CR0, descriptors built and written through, four kilobytes
of extended memory written at both ends and given back, a file created
and read back byte for byte entirely from ring 3, a real-mode INT 21h
run on the client's behalf and printing its own line, and a reflected
INT 10h returning the screen width.  DPMI=OFF verified separately: the
client is told there is no host and stops cleanly, which is what the
switch is for.  Then the standing suite unchanged - A20TEST, EXECTST,
TSRTEST, XMSTEST, I13TEST, CURTEST, DISKTEST over seven volumes,
BATTEST, REDTEST, LFNTEST - and MEM still reading 624K with 623K free.

v0.27 - THE TWO THINGS A DOS BOX WENT ROUND THE KERNEL TO REACH
        (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
A guest's INT 13h and a guest's cursor.  Both were reflected to the
real BIOS, and in both cases the BIOS and the kernel then held two
copies of one thing and neither read the other's.

THE DISK BIOS (DOS\INT13.INC, new).  The kernel owns the disks: it
drives IDE controllers itself, it caches FAT sectors, whole FAT12
FATs, directory sectors and the last cluster it read, and it holds
writes until something asks for them.  A program going past all of
that straight to the BIOS could read a sector the kernel had a newer
version of; write a sector the kernel had cached, after which the
cache was wrong and stayed wrong; write a sector the kernel later put
back from a cache of its own, undoing the program's work without a
word; and on an ATA disk, drive the hardware down a second, entirely
independent path while the kernel's own PIO sequence was half done.

So 13h is claimed in the monitor's trap bitmap alongside 15h, and
served: 00h reset, 01h status, 02h/03h/04h read, write and verify by
CHS, 08h parameters, 15h drive type, and the EDD four - 41h, 42h, 43h
and 48h.  The extensions cost almost nothing because the block layer
underneath has been LBA all along; it is the PACKED calls that need
work, not the modern ones.

DRIVES THE KERNEL DOES NOT MANAGE ARE HANDED BACK.  The block layer
has slots for two floppies and two hard disks.  A machine with a
third disk has one this kernel never scanned, holding no volume of
ours and no cache to be wrong, and the honest answer for it is the
BIOS's.  AH=05h, format a track, is handed back too - refusing it
would mean a DOS box could never format a floppy, and the block layer
has no way to do it for them.

THE ORDER OF THE CACHE WORK IS THE WHOLE OF IT, and it is in
vol_syncdrv (DOS\FAT.INC).  FLUSH BEFORE: everything held dirty goes
out to the medium, so a read sees what the filesystem believes and a
write is not later undone by a cache being written out over the top
of it.  FORGET AFTER A WRITE: the sectors have become somebody else's
and every copy we hold of them describes what used to be there.
Mode 1 therefore DISCARDS rather than flushes - writing our copy back
over theirs would be precisely the bug being fixed.

It runs over every volume ON THAT DISK and not just the current one.
A disk carries several letters since v0.26, and a program writing
sectors is addressing the DISK: it has no idea which of our letters
its sectors landed in, and neither do we until we look.  Volumes that
were never mounted are skipped - they hold no cache to be wrong, and
mounting one there would mean reading a disk somebody is in the
middle of rewriting.  If the range covers a volume's own boot sector
the volume is unmounted outright, because the BPB we are working from
may no longer be the one on the disk; that is a guest running FORMAT,
and nothing short of a fresh mount is safe afterwards.

vol_select had to be split for this.  vol_swap is the mechanical half
- park the loaded volume, pull in another - and vol_select is that
plus "mount it if it is not mounted".  vol_syncdrv needs the first
and must NOT have the second: the volume it puts back may be one it
has just unmounted on purpose, and remounting it there, off a disk in
the middle of being rewritten, would undo the very thing that
unmounted it.

INT 25h AND 26h GO THROUGH THE SAME ROUTINE, which closes a hole that
predates the DOS box entirely.  They are the raw-sector API - going
round the filesystem is what they are FOR - and until now nothing told
the filesystem.  A program rewriting a directory sector through 26h
could watch the kernel put the old one back at the next flush.

A GUEST MUST NOT BE ABLE TO READ A SECTOR OVER THE KERNEL.  On a real
machine a program that reads a sector across the interrupt vector
table destroys its own machine and that is its own business; here it
would destroy ours.  Below the DOS box's arena sit the real-mode
stack, the thunk's register frame, the transfer buffer the block layer
stages BIOS I/O through, and the relocated real-mode stub - none of
them the box's, all of them being stood on by the very code servicing
the call.  And the failure is not local: the sector lands, the
transfer reports success, and the machine dies at the NEXT thunk with
an instruction pointer somewhere in the vector table.

That is not hypothetical.  It happened within the hour, from AH=08h
zeroing the caller's ES to return a floppy parameter table we do not
have - authentic BIOS behaviour, and it put the next sector at
0000:0F5C, on top of the real-mode stack.  Two fixes, and both were
worth having: AH=08h leaves ES:DI alone (every hard-disk BIOS does
anyway, and zeroing it cost a segment register to give nothing back),
and i13_bufok now refuses any transfer whose buffer lies below
V86_TPA or past the megabyte.  That still leaves 0000:7C00, where
every boot-sector utility ever written puts its sector.

THE CONSOLE AND THE BIOS DATA AREA (IO\CONSOLE.INC).  The console kept
its cursor in variables of its own and wrote characters straight into
video memory; a DOS box's INT 10h goes to the real BIOS, which keeps
the cursor at 0040:0050 and moves the hardware one to match.  Two
records of one thing.  After the first guest wrote a character they
disagreed for ever: the shell's next prompt landed wherever the kernel
had left off, on top of whatever the program had printed since, and a
guest asking INT 10h/03h where the cursor was got an answer with no
relation to the one on the screen.

The BDA is the truth now and this driver is one of its two users.
Every entry point PULLS the cursor and the screen geometry out of the
BDA before it does anything and PUBLISHES them afterwards, to the BDA
and the CRT controller both.  cur_row and cur_col still exist as
working copies for the span of one call, not as the record of where
the cursor is.

The geometry comes with it, which is the part that was not asked for
and is worth having: 80x25 is a DEFAULT now rather than a fact, so a
guest that sets 40 columns or 50 lines is followed instead of
scribbled over.  Every field is checked rather than believed - it is
memory a guest can write, and a nonsense column count would send the
arithmetic off the end of the page.  The display page is followed too
(a guest on page 1 gets kernel output on the page it is looking at),
and mode 7 is followed to the mono card's own 32K.  21h/F0h gained
AL=3, "how big is the screen NOW", and COMMAND.COM's DIR /P uses it -
counting 25 lines onto a 50-line screen stops twice a page and calls
each half a screenful.

TWO OLDER BUGS FELL OUT OF THE CURSOR TEST, both of them things that
appeared to work.

k21 - the door a DOS box comes in through - dispatched 00h-62h and
71h and nothing else, while int21_entry also dispatches 73h, F0h and
F1h.  So three whole families existed, worked perfectly from 32-bit
code, and answered "invalid function" to every guest.  The cursor
probe is what found it: the call returned success and the cursor did
not move.

And vdm_ptrtab, which says which registers hold pointers to be
flattened, has 63h entries and was indexed with AH regardless - so
every call above 62h read a byte from BEYOND THE END of it and used
whatever it found as pointer flags.  A stray P_DX in that garbage
turns a drive number into a megabyte-wide address.  Those families
also cannot be described by AH alone: 71h/47h takes a DRIVE in DL and
a buffer in DS:SI while 71h/4Eh takes a path in DS:DX - same AH,
opposite meanings - so they get a second table keyed on the
subfunction, and anything not in it converts nothing.

VERIFIED, DOSBox and 86Box, floppy and hard disk, BIOS path and ATA:
CURTEST's five checks - a character landing where the BIOS left the
cursor, the BIOS seeing where DOS left it, INT 10h and INT 21h
alternating on one line and writing YZ side by side, both of them
moving the cursor on, and the same position read back both ways round.
I13TEST's eight - geometry, a CHS read that ends AA55, the extensions
present, LBA 0 and CHS 0/0/1 coming back byte-identical, sector 0
refused, head 254 refused, a file DOS had just closed being visible on
the medium to a raw read, and a raw write going through the kernel's
cache rather than round it.  Then the standing suite unchanged:
A20TEST, EXECTST, TSRTEST twice, XMSTEST, DISKTEST on two disks and
seven volumes, BATTEST, REDTEST, LFNTEST, and MEM still reading 624K.

STILL OPEN here: a guest that leaves the screen in a GRAPHICS mode.
Text written by the console then goes into the framebuffer as
character cells and comes out as noise.  Doing better means routing
con_out through the BIOS teletype, which cannot be done from the panic
and exception paths this driver has to keep working in.  BUILD i13
traces every INT 13h a guest makes, and the status of every one that
fails.

v0.26 - A DRIVE LETTER IS A VOLUME (2026-08-09)
------------------------------------------------
Every FAT12, FAT16, FAT16B and FAT32 volume on the machine now gets a
letter, in the order DOS gave them out.

WHAT WAS WRONG, and it was wrong in four ways at once.  Logical drive 2
meant "BIOS drive 80h, and whatever the first non-empty partition table
entry points at".  So: a second primary partition was unreachable, an
extended partition was invisible, a non-FAT partition was mounted
anyway and then failed as "invalid media type", and a disk whose first
table entry happened to be the extended container mounted the
CONTAINER - four hundred bytes of partition table read as a boot
sector.  A drive letter was a disk, and a disk is not a volume.

So there is a table now, built once at boot by disk_scan, and a letter
is an index into it.  fat_mount stopped reading the MBR: it is handed
a start LBA and a length and mounts what is there.

THE ORDER LETTERS COME OUT IN IS NOT THE ORDER THE PARTITIONS ARE IN,
and that is not a detail.  DOS assigned the first primary of every
disk first, then all the logical drives, then the remaining primaries.
A disk built on a real DOS machine has its volumes labelled and its
AUTOEXEC written on that assumption, so getting the order right is the
difference between reading somebody's disk and reading somebody's disk
with the letters shuffled.  With two disks attached the test rig comes
out C: hd0-primary, D: hd1-primary, E: and F: hd1-logicals, G: the
second hd1 primary - which is exactly what MS-DOS 6 does with the same
disks.

HIDDEN PARTITIONS ARE HONOURED BY DOING NOTHING.  Types 11h, 14h, 16h,
1Bh, 1Ch and 1Eh are the ordinary FAT types with bit 4 set, which is
what a boot manager writes to make a volume disappear from the DOS
that is running.  They are simply not in part_isfat, and the test disk
has one to prove it stays invisible.

THE TWO BASES IN AN EXTENDED CHAIN ARE DIFFERENT, which is the classic
way to get logical drives wrong.  Entry 0 of an extended boot record
is relative to THAT record; entry 1 - the link to the next one - is
relative to the FIRST container in the chain.  Use one base for both
and the first logical drive is fine and the second is somewhere off
the end of the disk.  Both the kernel and the image builder had to be
written knowing that, and a builder with the same bug would have made
an image that only a reader with the same bug could read.

FAT TYPE IS DECIDED BY CLUSTER COUNT.  It already was, and the comment
saying so is now much louder, because the partition scan made it
tempting to believe the type byte instead.  A 32MB FAT12 volume inside
an 06h partition is legal and exists; so is a FAT16 volume in an 04h
that outgrew it.  The strings at offset 36h and 52h are a comment -
FORMAT wrote "FAT16   " into volumes that are FAT12 by the arithmetic -
and DRIVES.EXE prints the type byte and the real answer side by side
so that the difference is visible rather than theoretical.

OTHER CONFORMANCE, all of it small and all of it real:

  - ROOT DIRECTORY SECTORS ARE ROUNDED UP.  rootent/16 is only right
    when the entry count is a multiple of sixteen.  Every standard
    format is; a hand-made volume need not be, and the error puts the
    data area one sector out and every cluster with it.

  - THE BPB CAN LIE ABOUT ITS SIZE.  If it claims more sectors than
    the partition entry says the partition has, the smaller wins - a
    volume that reads past its own end reads the next volume.

  - TOTSEC16 ZERO MEANS USE TOTSEC32, and that is the DOS 3.31 rule
    that made FAT16B partitions over 32MB possible.  Checking those
    two fields the other way round sees a 33MB volume as a 512-byte
    one.

  - FAT32 MIRRORING.  Bit 7 of BPB_EXTFLAGS means one FAT is live and
    the others are deliberately stale.  Reads came off copy 0 and
    writes went to all of them, which on such a volume reads an
    out-of-date FAT and then destroys the copies it was told to leave
    alone.  fat_rdcopy and fat_wrcopies now ask.

  - DOS 1.x FLOPPIES HAVE NO BPB AT ALL.  The boot sector is code and
    an OEM string; the media descriptor byte in FAT[0] is the entire
    description of the format.  Four formats were ever made that way
    (160K, 320K, 180K, 360K) and all four are in a table now.  Only
    floppies get this treatment: a hard disk with no readable BPB is
    not a 1982 diskette, it is a disk that should not be guessed at.

  - AND A LOOSE MEDIA CHECK.  FAT[0]'s low byte must be F0h-FFh, and
    deliberately NOT "must equal the BPB's".  A strict comparison
    rejects real disks - media bytes get out of step when a volume is
    imaged or copied onto different geometry - and the loose form
    still catches the case that matters, which is a partition that is
    not a FAT volume at all.

TWO THINGS THIS FOUND ELSEWHERE.  cur_drive held a BIOS drive number
and every one of its eight users converted it back to a letter; with
several volumes per disk that conversion has no answer, so it holds a
letter now and the conversions are gone.  And COMMAND.COM had its own
copy of the drive limit - "cmp al,4" with the comment "A: B: C: D:" -
so raising the kernel's limit gave the shell four volumes it could
reach through the API and would not parse on the command line: DIR E:
listed E: and headed it with the label and free space of the DEFAULT
drive.  A wrong answer that looks like a right one.  There is one
LASTDRIVE in PMDOS.INC now and both sides use it.

MEMORY.  The parked per-drive state is eight blocks of 8.7K, and as a
"dup(0)" in a raw binary that was seventy kilobytes of zeros inside
PMDOS.SYS, read off the disk at every boot to arrive at the value they
already had.  It comes out of the 32-bit arena at startup instead:
PMDOS.SYS went from 89,279 bytes to 55,098 with four more drives in it.

TESTING THIS NEEDED A DISK THAT DOES NOT EXIST YET, which is why
TOOLS\MKMULTI.C is here.  MKDISK builds one volume, and one volume
cannot reach a single line of the new code.  MKMULTI builds a disk with
two primaries, a non-FAT partition that must be skipped, and an
extended chain holding two logical drives and a hidden one - and every
volume gets its own label and a file named after itself, so that
shuffled letters are visible rather than merely possible.

VERIFIED, DOSBox and 86Box, on the real ATA path and the BIOS one:
DRIVES.EXE showing the full table on one disk and on two; DIR and VOL
on every volume returning that volume's own label, files and free
space; a file copied ONTO the FAT12 partition of a hard disk and read
back; a file copied onto a logical drive inside the extended
partition; a subdirectory made, filled, listed, emptied and removed on
a logical drive; free space identical after the tidy-up; FAT32 booting
and reading unchanged; and BATTEST, REDTEST and LFNTEST green.

STILL OPEN on the disk side: sector sizes other than 512 are rejected
rather than supported - every buffer here is a whole number of 512-byte
sectors and the block layer counts in them - and the block layer has
slots for two hard disks, so a third is not seen at all.  Neither
affects any PC-standard medium.

v0.25 - A GUEST THAT STARTS A GUEST, AND ONE THAT STAYS (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The two things that were between "runs a DOS program" and "runs DOS
software": EXEC from inside a DOS box, and terminate-and-stay-resident.

ONE SET OF VARIABLES, AND A STACK BEHIND IT.  A DOS box used to be one
program - one V86 context, one PSP segment, one owner id, all single
variables that every routine in VDM.INC names directly.  The temptation
was to make them arrays and index everything.  What was done instead is
the opposite: the singletons still describe THE PROGRAM THAT IS ACTUALLY
RUNNING, and vdm_push copies the parent's set onto vdm_stack before a
child overwrites them.  Nothing else in the file had to learn about
nesting - not the DOS bridge, not XMS, not the fault handler.

And the exit loop never left.  A child does not recurse into vdm_run:
4Bh pushes, loads and jumps back to vdm_loop, and a child's 4Ch pops
and jumps back to vdm_loop.  Termination at depth 1 ends the box; at
any greater depth it is a return.  The kernel stack does not grow with
nesting, which matters because the ^C longjmp anchor is a single saved
ESP taken once at depth 0.

WHY A CHILD USUALLY FAILS WITHOUT 4Ah FIRST, and it is worth writing
down because it looks like a bug the first time: a .COM is handed every
free paragraph in the machine, so a .COM that has not shrunk itself has
nothing left to give a child and 4Bh answers "not enough memory".  Real
DOS does exactly this and every program that EXECs calls 4Ah first.
Nothing special-cases it; the memory manager simply says no.

TSR: THE EXIT THAT MUST NOT SWEEP.  31h and INT 27h resize the block
and then skip the cleanup entirely - not the memory, not the
environment, not the open files, not the extended memory.  All of it
belongs to code that is still there.

And it really is still there.  A PM-DOS box is created to run a program
and destroyed when it exits, so "resident" could easily have meant
"resident for the eight milliseconds until the box goes away".  It does
not, because the conventional arena and the real-mode IVT belong to the
MACHINE and not to the box: the block stays allocated, the vector stays
hooked, and the monitor reflects the next box's interrupt straight into
code loaded by a box that no longer exists.  TSRTEST proves it by
running twice and comparing segments - the resident copy answers from
040A while the second copy is at 0626.

THE TEST THAT WOULD HAVE PASSED ANYWAY.  The first version of TSRTEST
just checked for a signature, and that check was worthless: if the
resident block HAD been freed, the second copy would be loaded at the
same address - it is the first free run - would find its own code at
the hooked vector, answer itself and pass.  Two copies at two segments
is the only evidence that means anything.  A test that cannot fail is
not a test.

A BUG THAT NEARLY SHIPPED, and it is a good example of one field doing
two jobs.  vdm_extype is a REPORT: it is what the next 4Dh will say,
and it survives until something reads it.  Using it to decide whether
to free a program's memory meant that after a child went resident, the
value stayed VDX_RESIDENT while the parent ran on - and the parent's
own exit would then skip its sweep and leak everything it had.  Split
into vdm_resident, which is set by the resident exit, read by the
cleanup and cleared by vdm_pop, so it describes exactly one level's
departure.

THE IVT WAS NEVER OURS.  The monitor reflects untrapped interrupts
through the guest's own vector table at 0:0, and that table is the
BIOS's - which has never heard of DOS.  Vectors 22h-2Fh hold whatever
the BIOS left, which on a careful one is an IRET and on the rest is
nothing at all, so a guest's INT 2Fh could jump to 0000:0000 and start
executing the vector table as code.  This has been true since the VDM
was written and was never hit, because nothing had yet called a DOS
vector the kernel does not serve.  A TSR hooking 2Fh calls it every
time.  vdm_stubs now plants one IRET byte in the callback paragraph and
points the reflected DOS vectors at it, ONCE at boot and never per box -
re-planting them when a box starts would silently unhook every resident
program the moment the next one ran.

XMS HANDLES ARE BY OWNER NOW.  xms_release emptied the whole table on
the grounds that there was one VM and therefore no live handles at the
end of it.  Both halves of that stopped being true on the same day: a
box can hold a program and its children, and a TSR outlives the box
entirely - and its extended memory has to outlive it too, or the next
program is handed memory something else is still using.  Handles carry
XH_OWN and xms_relown takes only the ones belonging to the program
that ended.

WHAT IS DELIBERATELY NOT THERE.  4Bh AL=01h (load without executing)
and AL=03h (overlay, load at a caller-chosen segment with no PSP) are
refused with "invalid function" rather than half-implemented.  Both are
real functions; both are a different job from starting a program.

VERIFIED, DOSBox floppy and 86Box FAT16/ATA, both green on both:
EXECTST - a child with an inherited environment and a command tail, its
exit code through 4Dh, a second 4Dh reporting nothing, a missing child
failing with error 2, 4B03h refused, and FOUR LEVELS of recursion so
that the frame stack is indexed and not just pushed and popped once.
TSRTEST twice, across two boxes, at two segments, with MEM showing the
8K it kept.  NESTTEST - a fault two levels down, unwinding both levels
with conventional memory identical either side (624K total, 623K free
before and after).  And the whole earlier suite unchanged.

STILL OPEN, in the order it is wanted: FCB calls (vdm_ptrtab is empty
across 0Fh-28h, so pre-3.0 software and anything using 11h/12h for
directory searches gets invalid-function); a guest's INT 13h still
reflects to the real BIOS and goes past everything the kernel believes
about a mounted volume; and the console keeps its own cursor while a
guest's INT 10h moves the BIOS's.  Then DPMI.

v0.24 - THE LAST WAY ROUND THE A20 GATE, AND 624K (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------------
Two things: the hole left open at the end of 0.23 is closed, and the
DOS box went from 588K to 624K.

CLOSING THE HOLE.  0.23 emulated A20 in the page tables and left this
written down as the next thing worth doing: "the I/O permission bitmap
is all zeros, so a guest can drive port 92h and the keyboard
controller directly, and those are the OTHER ways to move A20".  Two
consequences, and the second is the serious one.  The emulated gate
and the real line could disagree, so a program's own experiment would
contradict what XMS told it.  And a guest that cleared the REAL line
would take bit 20 away from every address in the machine, including
the kernel's - PMDOS.SYS lives at 110000h and would have vanished
mid-instruction.  A DOS program doing something entirely ordinary
could kill the system, and it would have looked like a random crash.

THE FIX IS THREE BITS AND EIGHT OPCODES.  Ports 60h, 64h and 92h get
their bits set in the TSS I/O permission bitmap, which is what makes
them fault out of V86 instead of reaching the hardware; the monitor
then emulates IN and OUT for them, in all eight forms - immediate
port or DX, byte or word.  Every other port in the machine is still
the guest's, at full speed, which is the reason for a bitmap rather
than a blanket IOPL trap: a DOS program driving a sound card should
not be paying for the A20 gate.

The word forms are done as two byte transfers through the same two
routines.  That is what the bus does anyway, and it means a word
access straddling into a claimed port - IN AX,5Fh reaches 60h - is
still emulated correctly rather than half-emulated.

THE KEYBOARD CONTROLLER IS SNOOPED, NOT EMULATED.  Standing in for an
8042 is a job nobody should take on for the sake of one bit, and a
DOS box reading scancodes off 60h or spinning on the status bits of
64h is entitled to an answer from the actual chip.  So everything
goes through except the four commands that are about A20: D1h (write
output port, bit 1), D0h (read it back), and the DDh/DFh shortcuts.

D1h and D0h are SWALLOWED rather than forwarded, and that is the
important detail.  Sending D1h to the real controller would leave it
waiting for a data byte that is never going to arrive, and the next
keystroke would be eaten as the answer - the chip would be wedged by
our own interception.

D0h needed one more thing.  The canonical sequence is "ask for the
output port, wait for status bit 0, read 60h", and since the real
controller was never asked, bit 0 would never come up and a program
with an unbounded wait would sit there forever.  So a read of 64h
with a D0h outstanding has bit 0 set for it.  That is not a lie: the
byte IS ready, and vio_i60 is holding it.

INT 15h AH=24h IS THE THIRD ROAD, and it would have been missed if
the two hardware routes had been treated as the whole problem.  A
program can write port 92h, it can talk to the 8042, or it can ask
the BIOS to do one of those two on its behalf.  The first two are
intercepted in the monitor; the third is now answered by the kernel
(00h disable, 01h enable, 02h query, 03h "both routes exist"), and
before this it reflected to the real BIOS, which would have moved the
real line behind everything else's back.

XMS FUNCTION 07h NOW ASKS THE GATE.  It used to answer out of
xms_a20on, which was this driver's record of what it last set - fine
when the driver was the only thing that could move the gate, wrong
the moment the monitor started letting a guest move it too.  Two
records of one piece of state, and the one the driver kept was the
one that could be stale.  xms_a20on is deleted; there is a new
IOS_A20GET and 07h calls it.  A20TEST checks exactly this: it shuts
the gate through port 92h, with no driver involved, and asks XMS what
it thinks.

WHAT CANNOT BE TESTED FROM INSIDE THE BOX, and it cost a wrong test
to find out.  A20TEST originally ended by sending the 8042 command
20h - "give me your command byte" - to prove the chip was not wedged.
It came back FAIL on 86Box, and the evidence that the test rather
than the kernel was wrong was sitting at the shell prompt: a stray
"7".  The controller HAD answered; PM-DOS's own IRQ 1 handler read
the byte off port 60h before the guest's polling loop could get near
it, and 08h is the scancode for the 7 key.  The host owns the
keyboard.  A DOS box cannot hold a two-way conversation with the
controller behind its back - which is true of real DOS with any
keyboard driver loaded too, and is a decent argument for emulating
A20 rather than forwarding it.  The check was replaced by a second
D0h round trip with the gate the other way, which tests the thing
that IS ours to get wrong: the monitor's own snoop state machine
failing to clear.

AND THE PORT 92h RESET BIT is dropped rather than obeyed.  Bit 0 is
the fast CPU reset line.  A DOS box asking to restart is asking to
restart ITSELF, and the real port would take the whole machine down,
kernel included.  The A20 bit in the same write is still honoured,
which is what a program that writes 02h expects and what one that
writes 03h deserves.

588K -> 624K
------------
The other half of this release, and it is mostly arithmetic that
nobody had done since the addresses were first chosen.  Sixteen
kilobytes below 1MB now, against fifty-two.  For comparison: DOS 6.22
with DOS=HIGH,UMB and everything loaded high reached about 620K.

  the stub: 8K -> 4K.  Eight was a round number, not a measurement.
  The code is 2076 bytes, the GDT sits at 0C00h and the globals at
  0F00h, so 4K holds all of it with a kilobyte to grow into.  BUILD
  checks the size, so it is now a real ceiling.

  the real-mode stack: 25K -> 2.7K.  SP was 7C00h, and it was 7C00h
  because that is the number a boot sector starts life with and
  nobody had asked since.  Twenty-five kilobytes of stack that was
  never more than a few hundred bytes deep, sitting in the middle of
  what a DOS program wanted.

  the boot-only buffers moved INTO the TPA.  The FAT window, the
  directory sector and the E820 table are used while the kernel is
  being loaded and are dead before lm_init lays the first memory
  control block over the top of them.  Keeping them below the TPA
  cost 2.25K of real memory forever to store something nothing ever
  reads again.  This is what DOS itself did with its init code.

What is left is at its floor, and it is worth writing down so the
question does not get asked again: 1.25K of IVT and BIOS data (fixed
by the hardware), the thunk's register frame, 2.7K of real-mode stack
(every BIOS call runs on it with IRQs enabled, so the timer and
keyboard ISRs nest on it too - it could be 1K, and the 1.7K is not
worth being the reason a BIOS with deep INT 13h extensions scribbles
on the IVT), the 4K stub (the code that gets into and out of
protected mode, so it cannot live anywhere a real-mode far jump
cannot reach), and 8K of XFER (INT 13h cannot transfer above 1MB).

XFER is the only one with any give left: halving it to 4K would buy
4K and cost an extra INT 13h per track on every floppy read.  Hard
disks go through the kernel's own ATA driver and never touch it.  One
constant, if 628K is ever worth that.

TRAP, AND IT HAS BITTEN BEFORE.  Moving FL_FATBUF and FL_DIRBUF is
how PMIO once overwrote the code that was reading it, on the first
cluster of the first file (see v0.18).  Anything placed down here has
to be checked against the stub, the XFER buffer AND the boot sector
at 7C00h, not just against the TPA.

VERIFIED, DOSBox floppy and 86Box FAT16/ATA: A20TEST 13/13 on both -
port 92h set/clear/read-back, the 8042 D1h route both ways, D0h read
back correctly and again with the gate reversed, the DDh/DFh
shortcuts, INT 15h 2400h/2401h/2402h, and XMS 07h tracking the
hardware both ways.  XMSTEST unchanged and green.  VDMTEST green with
A20TEST added to it.  MEM: 624K conventional, 623K free, identical
before and after the suite, and the BIOS cross-check back to the
documented one kilobyte (129,919 against 129,920).

v0.23 - PAGING, XMS, AND AN HONEST A20 GATE (2026-08-09)
---------------------------------------------------------
Extended memory is available to a DOS box, and the 1MB wrap works.

XMS IS EMULATED, AND THAT IS NOT A COMPROMISE - it is the only thing
that can work.  A real HIMEM.SYS has two jobs: switch the CPU into
protected mode to move blocks, and own extended memory.  It can do
neither here.  The machine is already in protected mode, a guest runs
at CPL 3 in V86 and cannot leave it, and extended memory has belonged
to ARENA.INC since before the guest existed.  Every VDM ever written -
Windows, OS/2, DOSEMU - emulates XMS for exactly those reasons.

It is also LESS work than the alternative, which is the pleasant part.
The hard parts of a real driver are the mode switching and the block
move; here a block move is a REP MOVSB between two flat addresses, and
0Ch "lock this handle and tell me its physical address" can be
answered honestly because linear IS physical.

BLOCKING HIMEM.SYS TURNS OUT NOT TO BE NECESSARY, and it was worth
checking rather than assuming.  Every memory manager of the period -
HIMEM, EMM386, QEMM, 386MAX - asks INT 2Fh AX=4300h at init and
refuses to install if something answers.  So the defence is simply to
answer honestly, and no name-based check on DEVICE= is wanted: PM-DOS
decides what a file is by reading it, not by what it is called, and a
list of driver names to refuse would be the same mistake wearing a
different hat.  DEVICE= does not load anything yet in any case.

THE HOLE THAT WAS NOT SELF-SOLVING WAS INT 15h.  A program that
ignores XMS - and plenty did - asks the BIOS for extended memory with
AH=88h and moves blocks into it with AH=87h.  Both were reflected
straight through to the real BIOS, which on a 128MB machine would
cheerfully report every megabyte the kernel, PMIO, the page tables and
the arena are living in, after which AH=87h copies over them.  So 15h
is now trapped for 88h/87h/E801h/E820h and answers what a machine with
HIMEM loaded answers: NONE.  Everything else on the vector - the
mouse, the wait services - is reflected as before.

WHICH NEEDED A WAY TO CHANGE OUR MIND.  The trap bitmap is all or
nothing per vector, and PM-DOS now claims two vectors it only wants a
few subfunctions of.  IOS_V86INT (v86_intctx) is v86_reflect done to a
CONTEXT rather than to a fault frame, so the DOS side can look at a
call, decline it, and hand it to whatever the guest has in its own
IVT.  Without it, claiming INT 2Fh would mean swallowing the DOS
multiplex interrupt - which every TSR ever written hooks - silently.
That was already true before today: 22h-2Fh were being swallowed.

THE ENTRY POINT IS A HLT INSTRUCTION.  XMS is not reached through an
interrupt: a program calls INT 2Fh AX=4310h once, gets a far pointer,
and CALLs it forever after - so the entry point has to be 16-bit code
at a real-mode address.  Two bytes of guest-visible memory hold HLT
and RETF; the HLT faults out of V86, the VM loop recognises the
ADDRESS as ours, serves the call, steps IP past the HLT, and the RETF
takes the program home.  This is the standard VDM callback trick
(DOSEMU's magic opcode is the same idea) and it beats claiming an
interrupt vector, because every vector belongs to somebody - PM-DOS's
own CDD uses INT 60h.  The block is a table, so EMS and DPMI get
entries later without a second mechanism.  It is allocated from
conventional memory and marked owner 8, DOS's own marker for system
memory: a real driver costs conventional memory too, so the paragraph
MEM stops reporting is the truth rather than an accounting error.

NO HMA, DELIBERATELY.  01h answers 90h, "the HMA does not exist".
100000h is real memory here and nothing is using it, but handing out
the 64K a program would run its own CODE in means honouring A20 for
instruction fetches as well as data.  DOS=HIGH is the only common
customer and PM-DOS has no DOS=HIGH.

PAGING WENT IN FOR ONE REASON: TO MAKE A20 HONEST.  On an 8086 there
were twenty address lines, so FFFF:0010 came out at 00000h, and a
great deal of software written before 1985 depends on that wrap - it
is how a program tests for extended memory and it is what the A20 gate
was invented to switch off.  It cannot be faked by trapping; there is
no way to intercept an ordinary MOV.

With paging there is nothing to intercept.  A 16-bit segment:offset
reaches 10FFEFh at the very most, so THE WHOLE OF THE WRAP LIVES IN
SIXTEEN PAGES, and switching A20 is switching sixteen page table
entries between "point at yourself" and "point at zero".  Everything
else is the identity map, so the flatness the kernel has always had is
untouched: linear is still physical, every address in PMDOS.INC still
means what it says, and a bus-master device can still be handed our
own pointers.

THAT FORCED THE KERNEL OFF 1MB.  PMDOS.SYS was loaded at exactly
100000h, which meant two things, one of them already a live bug: a DOS
box writing to FFFF:0010 was scribbling on the kernel, and aliasing
those pages to emulate the wrap would have unmapped the kernel from
underneath the code doing the aliasing.  DOS_BASE is now 110000h and
the first 64K above 1MB belongs to the guest.

THREE THINGS THE PAGING ITSELF NEEDED:

  THE USER BIT.  V86 code runs at CPL 3, so a supervisor-only page is
  a page a DOS box cannot execute from.  The first guest after paging
  went in took a page fault on its own entry point - CR2 pointing at
  the instruction the loader had just successfully written there,
  which is a very clear message once the report includes CR2.  Nothing
  is given away by marking everything user either: a 16-bit
  segment:offset cannot reach past 10FFEFh whatever the tables say, so
  the guest is confined by arithmetic no permission bit could tighten.

  THE THUNK.  Protected mode cannot be left with paging on, so pm2rm
  clears PG before it clears PE - its own write to CR0, in that order,
  as the manual asks - and back16 puts it back, reloading CR3 to flush
  a TLB that has been living in real mode.  Everything involved is
  identity-mapped, which is the condition that makes it legal.

  A CEILING.  PG_MAXTAB tables of 4MB is what gets mapped, and
  arena_init is capped to it, because handing out an address nothing
  maps is a page fault taken somewhere unrelated with the reason long
  gone.

THE BUG PAGING FLUSHED OUT, and it is the one worth remembering:

  get_extmem computed the top of memory as EXTENDED_KB + DOS_BASE.
  Extended memory starts at 1MB; DOS_BASE was 1MB; the two constants
  had the same value and one of them had been standing in for the
  other for seventeen releases.  Moving the kernel up 64K made
  v_memtop 64K too high, which put the top of the arena PAST THE END
  OF RAM: the end-of-arena header was written into nothing, read back
  as rubbish, and every walk of the chain ran off the end.

  Before paging that was survivable - the walk stepped through
  non-existent memory finding nothing and eventually hit something.
  With paging it is a page fault in the kernel, which is how a fault
  that had presumably been latent for a while finally announced
  itself.  A MEMORY-MAP CHANGE MEANS RE-READING EVERY EQU THAT NAMES A
  FIXED ADDRESS - the same lesson FL_FATBUF taught when PMIO moved
  above 1MB, learned again from the other direction: it is not only
  addresses that collide, it is constants that were only ever equal by
  coincidence.

  Both halves are fixed.  get_extmem says HMA_BASE, which is what it
  always meant; and every walk of the arena chain is now bounded by
  arena_top as well as by the end marker, because the chain is data, a
  wild program can damage it, and a walk with no bound turns damage
  into a dead machine.

DIAGNOSTICS, since two of these were found by staring: the exception
report prints CR2 for a page fault, and the VDM says which vector a
guest died on and where.  The second one was written wrong first time
- it printed EAX, the REASON the monitor returned, under the heading
"vector", and V86R_FAULT happens to be 3, so every fault in the world
was reported as a breakpoint and an hour went looking for a CCh byte
that was never there.  A diagnostic that lies is worse than none.

STILL OPEN AT THE TIME, and it was the next thing done - see v0.24
above.  The I/O permission bitmap was all zeros, so a guest could
drive PORT 92h and the keyboard controller directly, and those are
the OTHER ways to move A20.  Two consequences - the XMS view of the
gate and the real one can disagree, and worse, a guest that clears
the real A20 line unmaps the kernel from itself, because the gate
masks address bit 20 for protected-mode accesses too.  The estimate
of "perhaps forty lines" was low by about a factor of four, and the
part that was not foreseen at all was INT 15h AH=24h: a program can
ask the BIOS to move the gate, which is a third road that neither
bitmap bit covers.

WHAT IS NOT THERE YET, in the order it is wanted: EMS; VCPI; DPMI.
The Windows enhanced-mode handoff is further out than any of those and
for a reason that is not effort: see below.

  [Revised after v0.25.  VCPI IS OFF THE LIST - it is for DOS
  extenders, WIN386 declines to be a VCPI client, and the Windows
  route that could work runs through DPMI instead.  The order is now:
  finish the VDM (EXEC and TSR are done as of v0.25; FCB calls and
  guest INT 13h are what is left), then DPMI.  EMS remains worth
  having on its own merits rather than as a step towards anything.]

ON WINDOWS, HONESTLY.  Standard mode is reachable: it runs as a DPMI
client, so a DPMI 0.9 host here would host it.  Enhanced mode is a
different animal and it is worth being clear about it now rather than
after building for it.  WIN386.EXE IS ITSELF A V86 MONITOR.  It cannot
run inside ours; under EMM386 it works only because EMM386 implements
the Windows/386 startup handoff (INT 2Fh AX=1605h) and SURRENDERS
PROTECTED MODE COMPLETELY while Windows owns the machine.  VCPI is not
the answer to this - VCPI is for DOS extenders, and WIN386 declines to
be a VCPI client.  And WfW 3.11 removed standard mode altogether, so
"WfW runs" means enhanced mode and nothing else.
The route, if it is ever taken, is therefore not a better VDM: it is
PM-DOS learning to PARK - answer 1605h, save its state, drop to real
mode with its memory declared as taken, let Windows own the machine,
and come back when Windows exits.  That is a plausible thing to build
and it wants deciding on purpose.  What matters for today is that
nothing in this design forecloses it, and VCPI is still worth having
on its own account, for DOS/4GW and Pharlap - and it forces paging,
which EMS and everything else need anyway.

WHY THE HANDOFF IS NOT BUILT YET, since it has been asked for: it is
blocked on its own prerequisites rather than on effort, and building
it early would mean writing a large piece of code that cannot be
executed even once.  WIN386 will not start without XMS, so HIMEM has
to exist first; it arrives as an .EXE, so the .EXE loader has to
exist first; and it needs a shell that can launch it, so COMMAND.COM
has to be able to run a 16-bit program at all.  Until those three are
in, there is no way to reach the 1605h broadcast, and therefore no
way to know whether the park-and-resume works.  The sequence that
gets there is the roadmap above, in order, and the handoff is the
last item on it rather than the first.
All of them are now done: the .EXE loader, a shell that can launch a
16-bit program (v0.22), and XMS (v0.23).  The 1605h broadcast is
reachable for the first time - which does not mean the handoff works,
only that it can now be attempted and watched.

SYS16.COM - building a PM-DOS disk from ordinary DOS
----------------------------------------------------
TOOLS\SYS16.ASM, a 16-bit real-mode .COM that does what CMD\SYS.ASM
does but from an MS-DOS machine, so the first PM-DOS disk no longer
has to be built by MKDISK on a Windows box.  Put SYS16.COM, PMIO.SYS,
PMDOS.SYS and COMMAND.COM in a directory, boot DOS, and "SYS16 A:".

One thing could not be carried over.  SYS.COM holds no boot image at
all: it runs ON a PM-DOS disk, so the boot code it needs is already
in its own sector 0 and it simply reads it.  There is no PM-DOS disk
here to read from - that one does not exist yet is the whole point -
so all three boot sectors AND stage 2 are BUILT INTO SYS16.COM, made
into DB statements at build time by the new TOOLS\BIN2INC.  wasm has
no INCBIN, and appending the binaries to the linked image would leave
the source not knowing their sizes - which matters, because BOOT2.BIN
is 1131 bytes and has to be padded out to its eight reserved sectors.
The cost is that SYS16.COM is only as current as the build that made
it; BUILD.CMD therefore builds it AFTER the boot sectors, every time.

The FAT type is worked out here, from the TARGET's own BPB by the
cluster-count rule, because there is no kernel around to answer
21h/F1h AL=1.  Otherwise the shape is the same: the target keeps its
BPB and only the code around it is replaced, stage 2 goes into the
reserved sectors on hard disks, the three files are copied and
re-marked, and the reserved-count check happens before anything is
written.  Unlike SYS.COM it takes any drive letter, not just A: to
D:, because the disk being built does not care which letter the
machine building it happened to use.

Two things this program has that SYS.COM does not need:

  - ONE MORE CHECK, sy_agree, and testing is what put it there: on a
    PM-DOS HARD DISK, MS-DOS DOES NOT READ THE VOLUME THE WAY ITS BPB
    SAYS (see the section below for what is actually going on).  It
    uses a layout of its own, so the boot sector and stage 2 land
    perfectly - INT 25h/26h count from the start of the volume, and
    that much both sides agree on - and then the three FILES go into
    a directory PM-DOS will never look at.  The disk boots as far as
    "missing command interpreter".  sy_agree asks INT 21h/36h, which
    answers in the DOS driver's own terms rather than the BPB's, and
    refuses the transfer when the two disagree.  This is NOT SYS16's
    bug - a plain COPY under the same DOS puts files in the same
    wrong place - the program simply declines to hand back a disk it
    knows is broken.  The practical reading: SYS16 is for FLOPPIES,
    where the two agree completely and everything was verified end to
    end.  A PM-DOS hard disk still wants MKDISK, or PM-DOS's own
    FORMAT and SYS.
  - TWO SHAPES OF INT 25h/26h.  The original addresses sectors with a
    16-bit DX and cannot speak to a volume of more than 65535 of
    them; DOS 4.0 added a packet with a 32-bit sector number.  Rather
    than predict which one a given DOS will allow, the first call
    tries the old form and, if refused, switches to the packet and
    stays there.  Every sector SYS16 touches is in the first 17 of
    the volume, so the choice is only ever about what DOS permits.
    Both forms leave the CALLER'S flags on the stack; rather than pop
    a word and trust every DOS to have left exactly one, SP is saved
    across the call and restored, with the carry carried over the top
    in AX (SBB AX,AX ... MOV SP ... ADD AX,1 - MOV does not touch the
    flags).

Verified on GENUINE MS-DOS 6.0 (the boot floppy out of S:\Computer
backups\PRESARIO\DISKIMAG\MSDOS6, padded from its truncated 2347
sectors back to the 2880 its own BPB claims).  SYS16 converted that
very disk: PM-DOS's boot code and OEM name in, MS-DOS's own BPB
preserved byte for byte through 3Dh, PMIO.SYS and PMDOS.SYS written
with attribute 07 and COMMAND.COM with 20 - and the disk then BOOTED
PM-DOS 0.21.  The hard-disk case was checked too, and correctly
refused by sy_agree.

DOSBox cannot test any of that, which is worth knowing before anyone
tries: ITS INT 25h IS A STUB that clears carry and leaves the buffer
exactly as it found it, and its DOS_SetFileAttr is documented in its
own source as not changing attributes.  SYS16 therefore carries two
build-time switches, both off in BUILD.CMD: -dSYS16_DEBUG dumps the
first 24 bytes of the sector buffer (the first question when a BPB
will not parse is always whether it was ever read), and -dSYS16_FAKEIO
puts the volume's first sectors in an ordinary file, SECTORS.BIN, so
every other line - the FAT-type rule, the splice, the room check, the
stage-2 placement, the copies - can be run under DOSBox against an
image that is then checked byte for byte on the host.  That is how
the FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32 composition were all three exercised;
only FAT12 and FAT16 have been through a real DOS, because MS-DOS 6
cannot mount FAT32 at all.

v0.21: the foundation pass.  Every "broken or missing" item on the
roadmap that was small enough to be embarrassing, cleared in one go
before the VDM work starts - because a VDM built on a COPY that
cannot take a directory is a VDM with a rotten floor under it.

  - COPY IS REWRITTEN, and the shape of it is one rule rather than a
    pile of special cases.  The tail is cut into ITEMS at whitespace
    and a '+' glues an item to the one before, so "A + B", "A+ B",
    "A +B" and "A+B" are all the same request - which is how DOS read
    them.  What is left is a list of sources and, unless a '+'
    claimed it, a destination.  Then: IF THE DESTINATION IS A PLACE
    (a directory, a bare drive, a trailing backslash, or absent)
    every source keeps its own name and lands there; IF IT IS A FILE
    there is one output and everything is concatenated into it.
    That single rule is why "COPY *.TXT ALL.TXT" joins instead of
    overwriting - the behaviour falls out, it is not coded for.
    "COPY A+B" with no destination appends B onto A by opening A for
    APPEND and starting the copy at the second source, which is safe
    where reading and writing one file at two positions is not.  A
    wildcard that matches its own destination is skipped with the
    "cannot be copied onto itself" warning instead of growing until
    the disk fills.  Report is now a count, "N file(s) copied".
  - DEL /P, and DIR /P and /W, through one shared sw_scan: it lifts
    every "/x" out of an argument, compacts the text in place, trims
    the blanks that leaves behind, and hands back a bit per letter.
    One scanner rather than three parsers is the point; the next
    switch anywhere costs a TEST.  A '/' NOT followed by a letter is
    left alone, because it is a path separator often enough to
    matter.  /P counts LINES rather than entries so the wide form
    pauses in the same places, and /W is five columns of fifteen with
    directories in [brackets].
  - DIR HEADLINES THE DIRECTORY IT IS LISTING.  It used to print the
    listed drive's current directory whatever the argument said, so
    DIR C:\SUB announced C:\<cwd>.  The fix needed the ORDER changing
    as much as the code: the pattern is now resolved BEFORE a word of
    the header is printed, and then 21h/7160h renders it absolute
    (its final component as typed, wildcards and all) and the final
    component is cut off, which leaves exactly the directory being
    walked.  The old cwd line is still the fallback when the kernel
    will not truename, which is right for every form with no path in
    it - and that is most of them.
  - 21h/7303h, GET EXTENDED FREE SPACE, and 36h's oldest limitation
    is over.  36h answers in 16-bit registers, so it saturates at
    65535 clusters and called a 40MB volume 32MB; that is why FORMAT
    works its own numbers out rather than asking.  Every field in the
    7303h record is 32 bits.  DIR's "bytes free" line goes through it
    now, with 36h kept as the fallback, and the proof is the 40MB
    FAT32 image: 40,962,048 bytes free where 36h would have said
    33,553,920.  The free-cluster walk came out of fn36 into
    fat_freecount so both callers count the same way.
    PM-DOS compresses nothing, so the record's "without adjustment
    for compression" fields repeat the plain ones - which is what a
    system with no compression is supposed to say, not a shortcut.
  - THE 86BOX FLOPPY IS NOT OUR BUG.  Four releases of roadmap said
    "something in the BIOS floppy route has never been exercised on
    iron"; a build with the new BUILD FDD tracing said otherwise in
    two lines.  INT 13h/08h comes back through the thunk with status
    00h and perfectly correct geometry - 80 cylinders, 18 sectors,
    2 heads - and then every INT 13h/02h times out with status 80h.
    An empty drive, in other words, and the BIOS agreed when asked
    directly: with the hard disk hidden the machine POSTs "Diskette
    Drive A : 1.44M, 3.5 in." and then says DISK BOOT FAILURE.  86Box
    is not inserting the image whatever fdd_01_image_path says.
    Nothing to fix in PM-DOS, and v0.20 had already turned the wrong
    answer ("No files found") into the right one ("Not ready reading
    drive A").  THE LESSON IS THE PROCESS ONE: a symptom seen only
    under one emulator was written down as a defect in our code for
    four releases running, and one build of tracing settled it.  The
    tracing stays, as BUILD FDD, for the next time.

v0.20: INT 24h is RAISED, not merely vectored - the disk finally gets
to say what went wrong, and the user gets to answer.

  - EVERY SECTOR THE FILESYSTEM MOVES NOW GOES THROUGH disk_read /
    disk_write (DOS\CRITERR.INC), which sit exactly where the ten
    `call dword ptr ds:[IOS_RDBLK]` sites in FAT.INC used to be and
    take the same registers, so the substitution was ten lines.  A
    failure there is no longer CF handed silently up the stack: the
    kernel builds the classic INT 24h register set and calls the
    vector.  Retry repeats the transfer (which is why the four inputs
    are kept in variables - the driver is free to clobber all of
    them), ignore reports success and leaves the buffer alone, fail
    returns CF to the DOS call that asked, and abort ends the program
    through 4Ch, which already owns every other kind of unwind here.
  - WHICH FAILURES DESERVE ONE was the open question in v0.19's
    roadmap, and the answer turns on a distinction the BIOS makes for
    us.  A hard-disk unit that will not answer INT 13h/08h (status
    FFh from BLOCK.INC) is not a drive that is not ready, it is NOT A
    DRIVE: no prompt, and the caller goes on failing with "Invalid
    drive specification" exactly as before.  A FLOPPY unit is the
    opposite case - A: and B: exist on a PC whether or not anything
    is in them, and "Not ready reading drive A" with a chance to put
    a disk in and press R is the oldest reason INT 24h exists.  The
    two answers were checked on the machines that show the
    difference: 86Box says "Invalid drive specification" for a D:
    that no controller answers for, and "Not ready reading drive A"
    off a real floppy controller.
  - AND A VOLUME THAT READS PERFECTLY AND IS NOT A FILESYSTEM.  DOS
    called that a critical error too - "Invalid media type reading
    drive A" - so fat_mount's failure exit splits in two: fm_iofail
    for the reads that already had their own prompt (asking twice
    about one disk is how you teach people to stop reading the
    screen) and fm_fail for the structural rejects, which raise 07h
    and, on retry, run the whole mount again because retry means the
    user has changed disks.
  - THE PROMPT IS COMMAND.COM'S, and it writes to STDERR and reads
    from CON opened for the purpose.  Both halves matter: the command
    that hit the error is quite likely to have had its output
    redirected into a file, on the very disk that just failed.
    Verified with DIR B: > OUT.TXT - question on the screen, "Invalid
    drive specification" in the file.  Only the answers AH allows are
    offered; the kernel never offers Ignore, which is what MS-DOS 5
    and 6 did.  An unrecognised key is read again in silence rather
    than reprinting the question, or a leaned-on keyboard becomes a
    screenful of prompts.  And the message starts on a line of its
    own - the first version printed " Volume in drive is Not ready
    reading drive B", which is not a sentence.
  - ABORT DOES NOT GO THROUGH THE KERNEL WHEN THE SHELL IS THE
    VICTIM.  Answering 2 is right for a child - the kernel ends it
    and try_exec returns as usual, the same shape as int23_hand's
    in_child path - but for COMMAND's own commands it would terminate
    the SHELL, and shell_restart means reloading COMMAND.COM and
    re-running AUTOEXEC.BAT off a disk drive that has just proved it
    cannot be read.  So the handler longjmps home instead, through
    the same cmd_gohome that ^C now shares.
  - WHICH NEEDED 21h/F1h AL=5.  The kernel locks INT 24h against
    itself for the length of a handler (an error raised inside one is
    failed, not asked about, exactly as DOS's error-mode flag in the
    SDA always did), and a handler that longjmps would carry the lock
    away with it - after which every critical error would quietly
    answer itself forever.  cmd_gohome says so before it goes, which
    covers ^C at the ARF prompt as well.  4Ch clears the lock too, at
    both its exits, because abort deliberately leaves it ON across
    the dying program's file-closing: flushing a dead disk should
    fail quietly, not ask another question.
  - THE VECTORS NOW GO IN BEFORE THE FIRST SECTOR IS READ.  dos_entry
    used to mount the boot volume and install 20h-26h afterwards.
    Harmless while nothing raised anything; fatal the moment a failed
    boot-volume read calls INT 24h, because the gate at that point is
    still PMIO's do-nothing IRETD, which returns whatever was in AL -
    and AL held the drive number, and nought means IGNORE.  The
    kernel would have carried on with an unread sector.  ANYTHING
    THAT TOUCHES A DISK BELONGS AFTER THE VECTOR BLOCK.
  - FORMAT HOOKS 24h ITSELF and fails everything.  A disk being
    formatted is frequently a disk that cannot be read - that is the
    reason - and the shell's prompt in the middle of it would be
    asking the user to arbitrate a failure FORMAT already reports,
    with an Abort that would take FORMAT down mid-write.  Every disk
    utility of the era did this; 4Ch puts the shell's handler back
    from the PSP on the way out, which is what v0.19 built.
  - AND THE ROADMAP ITEM IT SWEPT UP: "DIR of an unmounted drive says
    No files found".  resolve_core now sets rp_baddrv when the DRIVE
    is what failed rather than the file, 4Eh answers ERR_BADDRIVE
    instead of ERR_NOFILE, and DIR and VOL look for the label BEFORE
    printing a word of their header - so DIR B: is now the MS-DOS
    sequence exactly: "Not ready reading drive B", "Abort, Retry,
    Fail? F", "Invalid drive specification", prompt.

v0.19: the swap file is gone rather than promised, the PSP finally
carries what a PSP is for, and MEM is an external that has to ask.

  - THE SWAP FILE IS REMOVED, not deferred.  v0.18 decided against it
    and left PAGING= and SWAPFILESIZE= parsed and inert "as the record
    of a decision"; that was the wrong shape for the record.  A
    CONFIG.SYS statement that accepts a setting nothing will ever read
    is a promise the system does not intend to keep, and the place to
    record a decision is here, in prose, where it can say WHY.  Both
    statements, their handlers, the words PERMANENT and TEMPORARY, the
    paging_on/swap_kb/swap_perm settings, cfg_report and cfg_num all
    came out, and DISK\CONFIG.SYS lost the two lines.  They are now
    UNRECOGNISED statements, which is the honest answer: a CONFIG.SYS
    that names them gets told so.
    What page tables would still be worth having is unchanged and
    still not swapping - see the v0.18 note on address ALIASING, which
    would turn the 512K park copy into a pointer swap.

  - THE PSP CARRIES THE THREE VECTORS.  build_psp saves the LIVE
    22h/23h/24h into PSP+0Ah/0Eh/12h as the child starts, and 4Ch puts
    them back - so a child that hooks Ctrl-C or the critical-error
    handler and does not remove it cannot leave its own handler
    pointing into a slot that no longer holds it, which is the first
    thing the parent's next ^C would jump into.  This was the gap
    v0.18 flagged, and nesting is what made it matter: with one level
    the only victim was the shell, which reloads.
    Order matters in 4Ch: the vectors are lifted out of the PSP FIRST,
    before the sweep, because un-parking writes the parent's copy of
    the whole slot back over the PSP they live in.  They are installed
    at the very end, through term_vectors, which preserves everything
    because both callers are mid-unwind with live pointers in
    registers.
  - Also new in the PSP: the PARENT at +16h, and an INT 21h/RET thunk
    at +50h (the flat reading of DOS's far-call thunk).  Deliberately
    still absent: the JFT at +18h (handles are kernel-side, by owner
    id) and the two FCBs (there is no FCB API here).
  - THE DTA IS PER PROGRAM.  A child starts with its DTA at PSP+80h,
    the DOS default, and the parent's is restored from the nesting
    record when the child exits.  Both halves are needed: without the
    first, a child inherits a pointer into memory that no longer means
    what it did; without the second, a parent's 4Fh resumes into
    whatever the child left.  PSP+80h is the command tail, so a
    program that searches a directory before it has finished reading
    its arguments loses them - authentic, the oldest trap in the DOS
    book, and the reason every PM-DOS external reads its tail at entry.
  - 50h / 51h / 62h - set and get the current PSP.  51h and 62h are
    the same call; 51h came first and was undocumented for years, 62h
    is the documented one, and programs use both.  Worth noting that
    50h cannot be used to steal another program's files here, because
    ownership is by owner id and not by the PSP address 50h moves -
    a happy accident of the v0.18 design rather than a check.
  - 58h - the ALLOCATION STRATEGY, honoured rather than remembered:
    arena_alloc now really does first fit (0), best fit (1) and last
    fit (2).  First fit stops at the first candidate and is therefore
    also the cheapest; the other two walk the whole arena.  The 40h/
    80h "high memory" bits are accepted and ignored, and the UMB link
    state is 0 and refuses to become 1 - the only honest answer on a
    machine with no upper memory blocks.  The strategy is global as it
    was in DOS, but resets to first fit on shell restart so a program
    that sets it and dies cannot leave the system on it.
  - 52h - the "list of lists", DOS's most-used undocumented call.  Its
    one field with a meaning fixed across DOS versions is the pointer
    to the FIRST MEMORY BLOCK, which real DOS put in the word just
    BELOW the returned address; PM-DOS puts the flat equivalent in the
    dword just below it, and that is what MEM.EXE walks.  The rest of
    the block is PM-DOS's own shape - matching real DOS's DPB and SFT
    layout would be a fiction, since neither structure exists here.
  - 21h/F1h AL=4 - extended memory in KB and the top of the arena.
    36h reports disks and there was never an equivalent for memory:
    DOS's answer was "walk the MCB chain", which describes the arena
    and says nothing about the machine.  MEM prints both, and they
    agree to within the end-of-arena header (15,359 KB against the
    BIOS's 15,360 on DOSBox; 129,919 against 129,920 on 86Box).
  - 4Ah ON YOUR OWN PSP now succeeds.  A DOS program's traditional
    first act is to shrink its own block so a child can have the rest.
    There is nothing to shrink here - a PM-DOS program owns a fixed
    512K slot which is not an arena block, and EXEC parks the whole
    slot rather than allocating around it - but the call is answered
    rather than refused, because a program that gets an error from it
    usually gives up on the spot.
  - A REFUSED 4Ah GROW USED TO EAT THE ARENA.  arena_resize pulls in
    the free neighbours BEFORE it can know whether the request fits,
    so a request that then turns out to be hopeless left the block
    holding space it had silently absorbed: every refused grow quietly
    consumed a piece of the arena.  It now shrinks back to the size it
    started with.  The prober does exactly this - grows a block to 2GB,
    expects the refusal, then allocates the 48K hole above it and
    checks it is still at the same address.

  - MEM IS AN EXTERNAL, MEM.EXE, as it was in MS-DOS.  Being internal
    was wrong twice: it made the interpreter carry a report nobody
    needs at the prompt, and it hid the fact that everything MEM does
    it does through the API - a report that has to reach inside the
    kernel to work is a report that proves the kernel has no way to
    ask, which is why F1h AL=4 and 52h exist now.  It prints a summary
    table (kernel and slots, the arena, the total, plus the BIOS
    figure as a cross-check), and /D lists every arena block with its
    OWNER ID while /F lists only the free ones.  The owner column is
    the v0.18 design made visible: run it from inside a nested EXEC
    and you see the parked 524,288-byte slot charged to the PARENT,
    which is what makes the park get reclaimed if the parent dies.
  - A BUG MEM.EXE FLUSHED OUT OF MORE.COM, pre-existing and mine:
    mo_pause read its keystroke into out_ch, the very buffer mo_put
    was about to write the pending character from, and returned with
    AL clobbered by its own INT 21h - so the character sitting on the
    page boundary was replaced by the byte count of the last write.
    It had always been there; adding MEM.EXE to the disk moved the
    boundary onto a visible letter and CTRLC.BAT started printing as
    TRLC.BAT.  Fixed twice over: mo_put stores the character before
    pausing, and mo_pause has its own key_ch and a pushad.  The lesson
    is the general one - a routine called from the middle of a loop
    must not share a buffer with the loop, and after an INT 21h no
    register is yours.

  - Verified with a throwaway prober (scratchpad PSPTEST.ASM): 19
    checks covering all of the above, including a child that hooks
    23h and 24h and exits WITHOUT restoring them so the parent can
    confirm termination put them back.  19 of 19 on DOSBox floppy AND
    86Box real ATA.  Regressions green: BATTEST, CHTEST, REDTEST,
    CMDTEST, LFNTEST, LFNAPI, CTRLC.BAT, ^C inside a child (at
    MORE's page prompt, then ^C at the prompt again to prove the
    shell's own handler survived the child's death), DIR | MORE and
    DIR | SORT | MORE.
  - The prober's own first failure is worth writing down: a bare
    [PROG_PSP + PSP_PARENT] is an IMMEDIATE expression to wasm, not a
    dereference, so the first run compared the field's ADDRESS with
    the value and called the kernel wrong four times.  It needs
    "dword ptr ds:[...]".  Kernel code never hits this because it
    always has a register base.

v0.18: memory that comes back, programs that can run programs, and an
honest answer to "what version really?".

  - OWNER IDS.  Handles and memory blocks are tagged with a [cur_own]
    id now, not with a PSP address.  That had to change first: a
    nested program is loaded into its parent's slot and therefore has
    the SAME PSP ADDRESS, so an address comparison at termination
    would close the parent's files and free the parent's memory while
    the parent was still sitting there waiting to run.  Ids are
    monotonic and never reused, so a stale tag can never match a live
    program.
  - MEMORY IS RECLAIMED AT 4Ch.  48h stamps the arena block with the
    owner (the MCB header always had the field, written as 0 with a
    "later, a process id" comment); the new arena_freeown frees
    everything an owner still holds, and 4Ch calls it right after the
    handle sweep it has always done.  Before this, every 48h block a
    program did not free itself leaked until reboot.  Nothing had
    noticed because our own programs use the D32 BSS rather than 48h -
    which is exactly how a leak like that survives.
  - NESTED EXEC, EXEC_MAX = 8 deep.  A D32 image is linked for one
    absolute address, so relocation was never on the table and a
    second slot would only help a program built for the second slot.
    So the occupant is PARKED: its whole 512K slot - PSP, image and
    stack together - is copied into the arena, the newcomer is loaded
    over the top, and the occupant is copied back when the newcomer
    exits.  One record per level holds its frame, PSP, owner id and
    park address.  Depth 1 parks nothing: the shell lives in its own
    slot and is not disturbed, which is why the old single-level code
    worked without any of this.
  - Two things nesting forced, both easy to miss:
    (1) The path and the command tail are COPIED into kernel buffers
        at the top of 4Bh.  They arrive as pointers into the caller's
        memory, and for a nested EXEC the caller's memory IS the slot
        about to be overwritten - build_psp would otherwise copy the
        tail out of the program that had just replaced it.
    (2) 4Bh and 4Ch switch to the KERNEL STACK before writing the
        slot.  At depth 1 and beyond the caller's own stack is inside
        it, so loading the child - or un-parking the parent - saws
        through the branch it is sitting on.
  - A failed nested EXEC has to leave its caller untouched, and
    exec_load can fail with the slot already half overwritten, so the
    failure path un-parks the occupant before answering.  Tested
    deliberately (a bogus name at every level) rather than hoped for.
  - THE BUG THAT PATH HAD, worth remembering: i21_fail ends in RET,
    and resetting ESP to the saved frame throws away the return
    address int21_entry's dispatch CALL pushed just below it - so the
    RET went to a saved register value and the machine died with an
    invalid opcode in the middle of PMIO.  Handlers that move the
    stack must "call i21_fail / jmp i21_return", which is precisely
    why 4Ch had always done that dance.  The prober caught it; a
    build cannot.
  - 21h/33h: 06h answers the TRUE version (0.17 then, 0.18 now)
    because 30h deliberately lies "5.00" so that "DOS 3.0 or later"
    tests pass - 3306h exists in the real DOS for exactly that reason.
    00h/01h read and write the Ctrl-Break flag CONFIG.SYS's BREAK=
    sets, and 05h reports the boot drive (verified: 1 booting the
    floppy, 3 booting the FAT16 hard disk).
  - Verified with a throwaway prober (scratchpad EXECTEST.ASM) that
    allocates 64K per level, stamps it with a per-level pattern,
    nests, and re-checks its own pattern after the child returns -
    so a parent whose memory or stack got damaged would say so.  Four
    levels deep, the depth limit refused at 8, MEM identical before
    and after (~1.8MB of leaked blocks and park areas all reclaimed),
    on DOSBox floppy AND 86Box real ATA.  Regressions green: BATTEST,
    CHTEST, REDTEST, CMDTEST, DIR | SORT | MORE.
  - Still absent, and now the obvious next gap: a program's PSP does
    not save the parent's 22h/23h/24h vectors, so a child that hooks
    one does not have it restored on exit.  Nesting makes that matter
    in a way one level never did.  [Done in v0.19.]

  - ON PAGING, decided here: the SWAP FILE is dropped.  A 32-bit
    machine with 16MB and a 512K program slot has nothing to page out
    to, and disk-backed virtual memory would buy PM-DOS nothing but a
    page-fault handler, an eviction policy and the loss of "linear IS
    physical" - the property that lets the ATA driver hand its own
    addresses straight to a bus-master PRD table with none of the
    pinning problem everybody else has.  PAGING= and SWAPFILESIZE=
    stay parsed and inert, as the record of a decision rather than a
    promise.
    What page tables WOULD still be worth having is address
    ALIASING, which is a different thing from swapping: map the one
    program-slot address onto a different physical frame per nesting
    level and the park-and-restore copy above becomes a pointer swap.
    That is the version of paging with a real customer, and it can be
    taken up whenever the copying actually hurts.

v0.17: the system files are PMIO.SYS and PMDOS.SYS - our own names,
for a good reason - and volume labels print properly.

  - The v0.16 rename to IBM's names was solving a problem that does
    not exist.  Software does not identify DOS by looking for
    IBMBIO.COM on the disk; it ASKS, through INT 21h - 30h for the
    version, and the OEM byte for the maker.  Nothing outside the
    boot chain ever opens the kernel files by name, so their names
    are ours to choose, and a name that says what the product is
    beats one that impersonates somebody else's.  PMIO.SYS and
    PMDOS.SYS it is.  (v0.16 shipped nowhere but this workspace; the
    entry below stays as the record of the detour.)
  - Same four functional places as before, and only those: the
    11-byte FAT forms 'PMIO    SYS' in BOOT.ASM and BOOT2.ASM,
    'PMDOS   SYS' in IORM.ASM, and SYS.ASM's two copy strings.  The
    padding is what matters in those literals - they must stay
    exactly 11 bytes - so they were retyped by hand rather than
    swept up with the prose.
  - Another on-disk contract change, so another version bump: a
    v0.17 boot sector wants PMIO.SYS and will not boot a v0.16 disk.
    Rebuild, or SYS an old disk from a new one.
  - The shorter name paid back v0.16's boot-sector debt: 'PMIO.SYS
    not found' is two bytes shorter than the IBMBIO spelling, which
    bought back the trailing CRLF v0.16 had to strip out of msgHalt.
    The sector is whole again rather than carrying a workaround.
  - VOLUME LABELS OVER 8 CHARACTERS PRINT CORRECTLY.  A label is not
    a filename: it is eleven free-form bytes with no name/extension
    split.  4Eh was rendering every 11-byte directory name as 8.3,
    which spliced a dot in after the eighth byte and turned the
    label "RENAMED16" into "RENAMED1.6" for DIR's header line and
    for VOL.  fn4E now recognises a label - by the same VOLUME-set,
    DIR-clear test fat_search uses, so an LFN fragment cannot reach
    it - copies all eleven bytes and only right-trims.  DIR and VOL
    both read that one field, so both are fixed by the one change.
    Verified: "LONGLABEL11" intact at the full eleven characters,
    "MY VOL D:" keeping its embedded spaces (only trailing padding
    goes), and ordinary 8.3 filenames still dotted correctly.
  - Verified: floppy, FAT16 and FAT32 boots; FORMAT then SYS then a
    standalone boot of the result on FAT16 and FAT32; 86Box on real
    ATA hardware; BATTEST and CMDTEST regressions.
  - 21h/30h NOW ANSWERS BH = 03h, PM-DOS's own OEM number.  It used
    to answer 0, which is IBM - the one identity claim the rename had
    just decided not to fake, hiding in the one call that actually
    makes it.  The version still says 5.00 because that is what
    programs TEST; answering "0.17" would fail every "DOS 3.0 or
    later" check ever written.  03h because the published numbers
    (Ralf Brown's list) leave it open - 00h IBM, 01h Compaq, 02h MS
    packaged, 04h AT&T, 05h Zenith, 06h HP - and picking one's own is
    what every clone did (DR-DOS EEh, FreeDOS FDh, PTS-DOS 66h,
    RxDOS 5Eh).  Those numbers were never centrally administered, so
    "unassigned" means unclaimed in the published list, not
    guaranteed unique.  BL:CX, the 24-bit user serial, stays zero as
    retail DOS did.
  - There is no OEM STRING in 30h, or anywhere else in the DOS API -
    just the byte and the serial.  The only OEM string a DOS system
    carries is the 8-byte OEM name in a FAT boot sector, and ours has
    always said 'PM-DOS  ' (BOOT.ASM's bsOEM; MKDISK writes the same
    into hard-disk volume boot records).  So there was nothing to
    invent.
  - Verified with a throwaway prober rather than trusting the build,
    which paid off immediately: the first run said OEM 00 because the
    kernel had not been reassembled after the edit.  "Build OK" for
    a program is not evidence about the kernel it talks to.

v0.16: the system files are IBMBIO.COM and IBMDOS.COM.

v0.16 (SUPERSEDED BY v0.17 THE SAME DAY - see above): the system
files are IBMBIO.COM and IBMDOS.COM.
  - IBM PC DOS called them IBMBIO.COM and IBMDOS.COM; it was MS-DOS
    that shipped IO.SYS and MSDOS.SYS.  PM-DOS had been carrying a
    hybrid of the two - IBM's names with Microsoft's extension - so
    the ".SYS" halves are gone.  The layout is unchanged: IBMBIO.COM
    is still the 8K real-mode stub plus the protected-mode body,
    IBMDOS.COM still the flat 32-bit kernel at 100000h.
  - Renamed in every place a NAME is matched, which is what actually
    matters: BOOT.ASM's fname and BOOT2.ASM's ioname (the 11-byte
    FAT forms, now 'IBMBIO  COM'), IORM.ASM's dosname ('IBMDOS  COM'),
    and SYS.ASM's name_io/name_dos.  Everything else was prose.
  - THIS IS AN ON-DISK CONTRACT CHANGE, hence the version bump: a
    v0.16 boot sector looks for IBMBIO.COM and will not boot a disk
    carrying IBMIO.SYS, and vice versa.  Rebuild the images (or SYS
    an old disk from a new one) rather than mixing halves.
  - The boot sector overflowed on the first attempt: 'IBMBIO.COM not
    found' is one byte longer than 'IBMIO.SYS not found' and the
    sector had exactly zero slack (see the size-guard note below).
    Paid for by dropping the trailing CRLF from msgHalt - the machine
    reboots on the keypress, so a newline after "Press a key to
    reboot" was never seen anyway.  One byte spare now.
  - IORM's debug banner said "v0.11" and had done for four releases.
    It carries no version number now: this file cannot see
    PMDOS_MINOR as text, so a literal one only ever goes stale.  The
    kernel banner has the version; the stub just says who is talking.
  - MKDISK needed no code change - its "the first two files are the
    system files" rule is positional, never by name.
  - Verified: floppy boot, FAT16 and FAT32 two-stage hard-disk boot
    (all three find both files by their new names, which IS the
    test - a wrong name halts), FORMAT then SYS then a standalone
    boot of the result on FAT16 and FAT32, and 86Box on real ATA
    hardware through the two-stage loader.
  - Found while testing, not fixed: a volume label longer than 8
    characters displays with a dot spliced in ("RENAMED16" shows as
    "RENAMED1.6") because DIR and VOL read the label through the
    classic find, which renders every 11-byte name as 8.3.  A label
    is not a filename and should be copied verbatim.  Earlier tests
    all used 8-character labels, which is why it never showed.

v0.15: FORMAT.COM, LFN=ON|OFF, and the last of the quoting - the
three loose ends the LFN trilogy and v0.14 left behind.

  - FORMAT.COM.  PM-DOS cannot low-level format and never will - an
    IDE disk has no tracks to lay down - so FORMAT is the structural
    rebuild it has really been since the AT.  The TARGET's own BPB
    supplies the geometry: fresh FATs (entry 0 carrying the media
    byte, entry 1 the end marker, and on FAT32 the root cluster its
    EOC), an emptied root directory, and on FAT32 a rebuilt FSInfo
    plus its mirror.  The BOOT SECTOR IS NOT TOUCHED, which is what
    makes FORMAT-then-SYS work and leaves a data disk whatever stub
    it had.  /Q stops there; without it every data sector is read
    back and a failing sector's cluster is marked bad in the fresh
    FAT (one mark per cluster, however many of its sectors fail),
    with an NN-percent line that only redraws when the number moves.
  - FORMAT reports from its OWN numbers, not 21h/36h's.  That call
    returns clusters in a 16-bit register, so it saturates at 65535
    and called a 40MB volume a 32MB one; the program that just laid
    the volume out knows the truth exactly.  Caught in testing, and
    the reason the roadmap's 32-bit free-space API matters.
  - 21h/F1h AL=2 (remount) exists for FORMAT: the volume has been
    rewritten UNDERNEATH the kernel, so every cached notion of it is
    discarded UNFLUSHED - the dirt describes a dead filesystem - and
    the BPB is read afresh, the drive's directory back at the root.
    Without it the kernel would keep serving the old volume's FAT
    and free count until a reboot.  Verified: format, then write to
    the volume immediately, no reboot.
  - LFN=ON|OFF in CONFIG.SYS.  OFF makes the whole 71xxh family
    answer AX=7100h - the authentic "no LFN here", the very code
    tools probe for - and stops fat_search accepting a long name on
    the classic calls, so matching is strict 8.3 exactly as real DOS.
    The flag lives OUTSIDE vol_state on purpose: it is a system
    setting, and a volume swap must not be able to overwrite it.
    Deletes and renames still tombstone LFN chains, invisible in an
    8.3 world and the reason a disk stays clean for the next LFN=ON
    boot.  ON is the default; the shipped CONFIG.SYS says so out
    loud rather than relying on it.
  - COMMAND adapts per call rather than probing at startup: the new
    xfind_first/next/close wrapper tries 714Eh and, on AX=7100h,
    drops to the classic 4Eh/4Fh pair and recasts the DTA result
    into the same find_data record - the 8.3 text landing in BOTH
    name fields, so DIR's long column simply disappears.  No flag to
    go stale, and LFN=OFF needed no changes in DIR, DEL or IF EXIST.
  - Quoted VERBS: "C:\Some Dir\prog" args.  The last quoting hole
    from v0.13's phase 3.  A quoted verb is a program path taken as
    typed, and an internal command is never quoted (quotes make it a
    FILE, as NT's shell had it), so the table and the drive-change
    forms are skipped.  Advanced parsing only - to a .BAT file a
    quote is still just a character.
  - PATH= directory search, which quoted verbs wanted anyway.  The
    current directory first, then each ';'-separated PATH element,
    trying .COM/.EXE/.BAT/.CMD in each (NT's order, already the
    search order since v0.13).  A verb that carries its own
    directory is not PATH's business and is never searched for.
    Also: the verb scanner now ends a verb at '=', so PATH=C:\DOS
    parses - the form every AUTOEXEC.BAT on earth uses.
  - A real bug the PATH work exposed: try_exts walked its extension
    table with EBX, and try_exec loads EBX with the EXEC parameter
    block.  The table cursor came back pointing into the parameter
    block, so the second candidate read a garbage table entry and
    the loop ran off into memory - COMMAND hung.  It only showed up
    once something had to try a SECOND extension, which is why every
    v0.13 test passed: they all found .COM first.  Push it.
  - Verified DOSBox: FAT12 floppy (/Q and full, label and none),
    FAT16 and FAT32 hard disks (full verify pass on FAT32) each
    followed by SYS and a standalone boot from the ex-blank disk, and
    every refusal - usage, current drive, bad drive, bad switch, and
    N at the warning leaving the disk untouched.  LFN=OFF proved
    three ways: LFNAPI reporting ax=7100, a long name refused, its
    8.3 alias working.  86Box on real ATA hardware: PATH= search,
    the LFN column, FORMAT's drive parsing and refusals, CHTEST.
    Regressions all green - CMDTEST, REDTEST, BATTEST, CTRLC,
    DIR | SORT | MORE.
  - Two pre-existing gaps found while testing, both on the roadmap
    now: COPY will not take a bare drive or a directory as its
    destination (COPY F D: fails; COPY F D:\F works), and DIR of an
    unmounted drive says "No files found" rather than saying the
    drive is not ready - the missing "bytes free" line is the only
    hint.  The 86Box floppy reads as unmounted there, which is how
    the DIR gap surfaced; that path has never been verified on real
    hardware and is its own investigation.

v0.15 addendum: the environment variables DOS actually ships with.
  - COMSPEC is set automatically, and it names the interpreter that
    is REALLY running.  A CONFIG.SYS SHELL= line can choose any
    interpreter, and the shell cannot see its own name - so the
    KERNEL answers, through the new 21h/F1h AL=3 (the shell's path,
    ASCIIZ into the buffer at EDX).  COMMAND asks once at startup,
    before AUTOEXEC.BAT runs, because %COMSPEC% in an AUTOEXEC is
    the whole point of it.  Verified with a disk whose CONFIG.SYS
    says SHELL=A:\MYSHELL.COM: COMSPEC came back naming MYSHELL.COM,
    and AUTOEXEC still ran (the /P on that line working too).
  - PATH is a real DOS PATH now.  "PATH;" clears the search path -
    the verb scanner ends a verb at ';' as well as '=' without
    eating it, so "PATH;" and "PATH ;" arrive here identically - and
    "PATH" with nothing set says "No Path" while a set path echoes
    back as "PATH=C:\DOS;C:\TOOLS", the form you would type.  Those
    are separators in real DOS, not name characters.
  - PROMPT is the complete MS-DOS 6.22 code set: $V (version) and $H
    (backspace) were the two missing.  $H needs no help - the
    console's own backspace already erases - and $V asks the kernel
    exactly as VER does, so the prompt cannot disagree with VER.
  - Note that %VAR% expansion at the interactive prompt is NOT a
    thing in COMMAND.COM (cmd.exe invented that): ECHO %COMSPEC% at
    the prompt prints the text back literally, and only a batch line
    expands it.  PM-DOS behaves the same way, and that is correct
    rather than a gap - checked both ways.

v0.14: SYS.COM, and CTRL-C / INT 23h.
  - INT 25h/26h exist now - the DOS absolute disk read/write API,
    volume-relative as always (the partition offset is the kernel's
    business).  Flat deviations, both deliberate: the buffer rides
    in EBX (the flat reading of DS:BX) and the infamous flags-word-
    left-on-the-stack quirk is NOT reproduced - plain IRET returns.
    Bounds-checked against the volume.  21h/F1h AL=1 reports a
    volume's FAT type (DL = drive), so a tool never reimplements the
    cluster-count rule the kernel already knows.
  - SYS.COM carries NO boot image at all.  The source disk is itself
    bootable, so its boot code is sitting in its own logical sector
    0: read it, splice the TARGET's BPB over the middle (through
    3Dh for FAT12/16, 59h for FAT32), write it out - plus the FAT32
    backup at sector 6 - then copy the reserved-sector stage 2
    (S2_START16/32, hard disks only) and the three system files,
    IBMIO.SYS and IBMDOS.SYS re-marked R+H+S.  Same-FAT-type
    enforced via F1h AL=1.  The target's reserved-sector count is
    checked BEFORE anything is written: the first attempt against a
    one-reserved-sector target wrote stage 2 over the FATs, which is
    why the classic "No room for system on destination disk"
    message exists.  MKDISK grew -active (mark the partition
    bootable, reserve the stage-2 room) to build exactly such a
    target; the full round trip - blank disk, SYS from a running
    system, reboot from the ex-blank - verified on FAT16 AND FAT32.
  - CTRL-C: the console input paths (std_in for 01h/07h/08h, 0Ah's
    keyboard loop, 3Fh's device read) recognise 03h from the
    KEYBOARD, echo "^C" and raise INT 23h.  File-fed input is never
    checked - a redirected stdin cannot press anything.  The
    kernel's default 23h handler terminates the running program with
    a plain 21h/4Ch, which unwinds every nested frame by
    construction.  A handler that IRETs back resumes the interrupted
    read, ^C swallowed.
  - COMMAND.COM hooks 23h the way the real one does.  Two ^Cs: a
    CHILD running ([in_child], set around 4Bh) - terminate it with
    4Ch right from the handler, which surfaces inside COMMAND's own
    EXEC frame and try_exec returns normally.  COMMAND's own
    command, batch or prompt - longjmp to the main loop ([break_esp],
    the entry-level ESP), pop every batch level (^C ends a batch
    job), and force fresh CON handles over 0 and 1, which also
    closes-and-flushes any file a broken redirection left installed.
    Verified: ^C at the prompt (clean new prompt, no banner), ^C at
    a batch PAUSE (batch dies, no lines after), ^C into a blocked
    CHOICE (child dies), ^C during PAUSE > FILE (file flushed,
    console restored, next ECHO lands on screen).
  - Build-system lesson, now fixed in BUILD.CMD: wasm 1.9 exits 0
    EVEN ON ERRORS, so "|| goto :fail" never caught a failed
    assembly and a stale .obj linked silently.  But a failed
    assembly produces NO object file - so BUILD.CMD deletes every
    .obj up front, turning the stale-object link into a loud wlink
    failure.  (Found when a label collision - cmd_break was already
    the BREAK command - shipped a v0.13 COMMAND inside a v0.14
    build.)
  - DIR D: (and DIR PATH\) glue *.* on directly now - resolve_parent
    calls a bare drive "a directory itself", which the 714Eh find
    rightly refuses, so the old probe never listed it.  No backslash
    after the colon, so the drive form lists that drive's CURRENT
    directory, as DOS does.

v0.13 addendum (2026-08-07, same day): MORE.COM and SORT.COM - the
classic pipe consumers, external commands like CHOICE.  No version
bump: the first delivery that changes neither versioned binary
(kernel and COMMAND untouched; two new files on the images).
  - MORE pages stdin (TYPE F | MORE, MORE < F) or a named file - a
    convenience the real one never had; quoted long names fine.  24
    rows, column-wrap counted, "-- More --" erased after the key.
    The keystroke comes from CON, opened DIRECTLY: stdin is the very
    thing being paged, so the keyboard is reached AROUND it, exactly
    the real MORE's trick.  The pause is LAZY (before the next
    character, not after the 24th line), so a file ending on a page
    boundary never asks for a key it does not need.  Writing to the
    read-mode CON handle works because fn40's device branch sits
    before the mode check - handy, and now load-bearing.
  - SORT reads everything (stdin or a named file), splits lines
    (CR LF, LF, ^Z endings), insertion-sorts a pointer array case-
    insensitively, writes lines + CRLF to stdout.  /R descending,
    /+n compare-from-column (short lines count as empty, as DOS had
    it).  Capacity 256K text + 8192 lines - the classic managed 64K.
    All of it lives in the D32 BSS (an img_end label carved up at
    runtime), so SORT.COM is 800 bytes on disk: first real use of
    the header's BSS field by a program.  One byte of the text
    buffer is held back so a final line with no newline always finds
    a zero terminator waiting in the BSS.
  - Verified DOSBox floppy: DIR | SORT (sorted listing, long-name
    columns riding along), SORT /R < F vs SORT F, TYPE F | MORE
    paging + keypress, and DIR | SORT | MORE - three stages through
    the alternating pipe files, %PIPE1.$$$ visible in its own
    listing exactly as real DOS shows its pipe temps.  86Box FAT16/
    ATA: MORE file + page turn, SORT file.

v0.13: long file names, the COMMAND side (phase 3 of 3) - quoting
end to end, and the .CMD batch class.
  - One flag rules it all: [adv_parse].  When it is set, '"' groups
    arguments; when it is clear, '"' is an ordinary character and
    every parser behaves byte-for-byte as it did in v0.8.  The
    console sets it (the interactive prompt speaks quotes, as
    Win95's shell did); bat_getline sets it per line from the
    running frame's class: .CMD advanced, .BAT strict - the decision
    recorded back in phase 1, now enforced in exactly one place, so
    a batch file carried over from a real DOS install cannot change
    meaning here.
  - .CMD is a real batch class: the external search order is now
    VERB.COM, VERB.EXE, VERB.BAT, VERB.CMD (NT's order), an explicit
    .CMD extension interprets rather than EXECs (is_batname takes
    both suffixes through the shared ends_with), and the frame
    carries BF_CMD so nested CALLs switch modes correctly on every
    line boundary - a .CMD calling a .BAT drops to strict for the
    .BAT's lines and comes back up when it returns.
  - Where quotes now work (advanced mode only): two_args (COPY and
    REN take two quoted names); need_arg through the shared
    unquote_arg (TYPE, DEL, MD, RD - and via their own calls CD and
    DIR), updating [arg_ptr] so handlers re-reading it see the bare
    text; REDIR's three scanners (a quoted '|' is text not a pipe, a
    quoted '>' is text not a redirector, and > "Long Name.txt" opens
    the right file with the quotes shed before the kernel ever
    looks); batch invocation arguments (a quoted group is ONE %n and
    KEEPS its quotes, Windows style, so %1 re-parses correctly
    wherever the batch file plants it); FOR set items (a quoted item
    is one item, quotes kept for the same reason); IF EXIST and CTTY
    through next_arg (quotes shed - these consume the text
    directly).
  - IF EXIST also moved from the classic 4Eh find to 714Eh/71A1h,
    because the classic find is pure 8.3 by design and a long name -
    quoted or not - must test true.  DIR's is-it-a-directory probe
    moved the same way, so DIR "Long Directory" lists the CONTENTS,
    long name resolved, rather than falling back to listing the
    entry.
  - Deliberately NOT quoted: the verb itself (CALL "My Prog" stays
    unsupported, as in MS-DOS), wildcards inside quotes in FOR sets
    (a quoted item is taken literally), and FOR's wildcard expansion
    which stays on the classic find on purpose - it returns 8.3
    aliases, which substitute into the body unquoted and always
    parse, exactly Win95's own reasoning.
  - The tail handed to EXTERNAL programs keeps its quotes verbatim:
    what an argument means is the program's business.
  - Test set: CMDTEST.CMD (quoted redirection birth of a spaced long
    name, quoted COPY/REN pairs, quoted IF EXIST both ways, quoted
    FOR items, CALL SUBQ.CMD "Quoted Long Name.txt" proving the
    one-%1 rule, CALL BATQ.BAT proving strictness - its quoted TYPE
    must and does fail - and quoted DELs cleaning up); the batch FOR
    variable is spelt %%F in the file, the classic rule.  Verified
    on DOSBox floppy, DOSBox FAT32 and 86Box FAT16/ATA, plus
    interactive quoted TYPE/COPY/DEL and DIR "Long Directory" at the
    console, with BATTEST, REDTEST and LFNTEST regressions green and
    VER 0.13 on all three.

v0.12: long file names, the write side (phase 2 of 3).
  - FAT.INC grew the creating half of VFAT.  lfn_alias makes the ~N
    8.3 alias Win95's way: an up-cased basis from the name part
    (spaces and dots dropped, characters 8.3 cannot hold turned into
    '_', extension from after the LAST dot), '~N' spliced so the
    whole stays 8, N counting up until fat_search says the candidate
    is unclaimed.  lfn_store finds ceil(len/13)+1 CONTIGUOUS free
    slots - fragments must directly precede their 8.3 entry in
    enumeration order, and index order IS enumeration order - growing
    a chain directory as needed, then writes the fragments last part
    first (seq|40h down to 1, checksum from lfn_cksum, characters as
    UCS-2 with 0000 terminator and FFFF padding) and hands the caller
    the seek'd 8.3 slot.  lfn_cksum was extracted from lfnw_seal so
    both sides share the one ror8+add.
  - The three creation guards from v0.11 became the three creation
    paths: 3Ch-new, 39h and 56h-destination all do alias+chain when
    [rp_flong] says only a long name can spell what was typed, and
    exactly what they always did otherwise - so guard rule 1 (8.3
    creates leave byte-identical directories) still holds by
    construction.  A long-named MKDIR is the file case plus the dot
    entries it always built; a long rename destination gets a FRESH
    alias in its home directory (the old chain died via lfn_tomb on
    the source side).
  - Classic 43h (get/set attributes) exists now too - it had never
    been implemented at all - and 7143h is the same attr_core with
    the subfunction in BL instead of AL.  Set masks to RHS+A and
    preserves DIR/VOLUME, exactly DOS.
  - The 71h dispatcher filled out.  7139h/3Ah/3Bh/41h/56h simply ARE
    fn39/fn3A/fn3B/fn41/fn56 - the register layouts match and the
    classic handlers are LFN-transparent, so the LFN forms dispatch
    straight onto them.  7147h derives the LONG cwd by walking from
    the root and collecting each component's primary name (the
    stored cwd stays pure 8.3 on purpose).  7160h truename renders
    CL=0/1 as the canonical 8.3 path and CL=2 as the long form, both
    through the shared path_render walker; a wildcarded or missing
    final component renders as typed, existence never being
    truename's business.  716Ch open/create is COMPOSED: it decides
    open/truncate/create, stages the path in F_EDX, and CALLS fn3D
    or fn3C on the same frame - their i21_ok/i21_fail tails just RET
    back - then restores the caller's DX and reports the action in
    CX.  Handlers being composable on the frame is a property worth
    keeping.
  - COMMAND's DEL now enumerates through 714Eh/4Fh/A1h instead of
    the classic find (which is pure 8.3 by design and could never
    see "DEL Long Name.txt"), deleting each hit by its returned 8.3
    alias.  MD, CD, RD, TYPE, COPY and REN needed nothing: they pass
    their tails to the transparent classic calls.
  - CMD\LFNAPI.COM is the new external exerciser for the API surface
    COMMAND never speaks: 71A0h, 7139h/3Bh/713Ah around a 7147h that
    must answer "Api Long Directory", 7160h both directions, 716Ch
    create-write-reopen-read, 43h get/set/get, 7141h delete plus
    proof-of-absence.  One line of output per probe; FAIL ax=NNNN
    and ERRORLEVEL 1 on any miss.
  - Failure hygiene note: fragments are written before the 8.3 entry
    (and in 39h before the cluster allocation), so a mid-create disk
    failure can strand a chain with no entry.  fat_search treats an
    unterminated chain as invalid and lfn_tomb-carrying deletes never
    make one, so the orphans are inert - the same debris a crashed
    Win95 leaves - and a future CHKDSK's problem.
  - Verified in DOSBox (floppy AND FAT32 hard disk) and 86Box (FAT16
    over ATA), all three: LFNTEST's write half (redirection-created
    long names with distinct ~1/~2 aliases, TYPE by alias and by
    long name, COPY and REN to long names, MD/CD/RD of a spaced long
    directory with the prompt canonicalizing to CREATE~1, DEL of
    every long name, DIR then finding nothing, free space returning
    exactly to baseline) and LFNAPI's eight probes all green; VOL
    still clean over our own written chains; REDTEST regression
    green; VER 0.12.

v0.11: long file names, the read side (phase 1 of 3).
  - The policy is TRANSPARENT-PLUS-71h, decided up front: the classic
    21h calls accept long names natively (a luxury DOS-mode MS-DOS
    never had), AND the Win95 71h API exists for LFN-aware programs.
    Two rules keep Win95 compatibility where it can be measured:
    (1) classic calls with 8.3-valid names must leave BYTE-IDENTICAL
    directories to real DOS - no case preservation, no stray chains -
    and (2) classic query calls (47h getcwd, 4Eh/4Fh find) always
    answer in 8.3 aliases no matter how the state was set.  Both are
    structural here, not policed: see the canonicalization below.
  - Decision, recorded for phase 3: .BAT files keep strict 8.3
    parsing for real-DOS compatibility; the advanced LFN parsing
    (quoted arguments and friends) arrives with a NEW .CMD batch
    class.  Nothing in this phase implements .CMD yet.
  - FAT.INC grew the VFAT collector: lfnw_frag accumulates the
    attr-0Fh fragments during any directory walk, lfnw_seal decides
    at each regular entry whether a complete, checksum-matched chain
    landed on it.  Orphans, deleted entries, out-of-order fragments
    just invalidate the accumulation - Windows treats them the same.
  - fat_search now takes an optional LONG side ([srch_long], consumed
    per search): when the 8.3 pattern misses, a sealed chain matching
    the long text case-insensitively is a hit.  resolve_parent arms
    it for the final component automatically, so open, exec, delete,
    rename-source, attributes - every lookup - became LFN-capable
    without touching the callers.  4Eh explicitly DISARMS it: the
    classic find can only carry 8.3 state in its DTA, and matching
    long once but never again on find-next would be worse than not
    matching at all.
  - fn_conv now reports lossy conversions ([fc_long]): truncation,
    spaces, second dots, leading dots.  That flag both arms the long
    match and exposed a LATENT BUG the old truncation hid: typed
    "LONGFILENAME.TXT" silently became LONGFILE.TXT and could open a
    WRONG existing file.  Lossy components no longer match by their
    mangled 8.3 form.
  - walk_to CANONICALIZES: after any component matches - by either
    name - the entry's own 8.3 name replaces it in rp_names.  The cwd
    therefore stores pure aliases, classic 47h keeps its 64-byte
    promise structurally, and CD "Long Directory" leaves the prompt
    saying LONGDI~1.  Long components live only in the caller's own
    path string, held by pointer for the duration of the call.
  - The 71h subset: 714Eh/714Fh find first/next (handle-based, dual-
    namespace matching, the 318-byte record, DOS times only), 71A1h
    close, 71A0h volume info answering "FAT, LFNs, case preserved".
    Everything else answers AX=7100h CF - the documented not-here
    signature.  Matching is Win95's: the 8.3 pattern against the 8.3
    name OR the long pattern against the file's PRIMARY name (its
    LFN, else its 8.3 as text), with "*.*" rewritten to "*" so
    dotless long names match it.  lfn_match implements '*' any-run
    and '?' one-char-or-none-at-a-dot-or-end, recursive on '*'.
  - Deleting or renaming an entry that carries a chain tombstones
    the chain too (lfn_tomb) - a PM-DOS volume does not accumulate
    orphaned fragments the way plain-DOS deletes on Win95 disks did.
  - Creation stays 8.3: 3Ch (fresh entry), 39h, 56h destination
    refuse a lossy final component until phase 2 writes chains.
    3Ch onto an EXISTING long-named file truncates in place though -
    that needs no new name and works today.
  - DIR walks 714Eh/714Fh now and prints the long name in a right-
    hand column when an entry has one - the Win95 look.  The label
    line and the directory-probe stay classic 4Eh.
  - VOL fix folded in structurally: LFN fragments are peeled off
    before the label test can see them, so a fragment can no longer
    print as 13 bytes of UCS-2 garbage pretending to be the label.
  - MKDISK plants an LFN test set (the C code is the reference for
    the phase-2 assembly: checksum, fragment layout, FFFF padding):
    two long-named files and, on the floppy, a long-named directory
    with a nested file.  The HD test files crosslink onto the last
    real file's chain - no new cluster machinery for a read test.
  - Verified in DOSBox (floppy AND FAT32 hard disk) and 86Box
    (FAT16 over ATA): DIR's long column on all three; TYPE by alias,
    by spaceless long name, by long name WITH spaces (TYPE takes its
    whole tail as the path, so no quoting needed); TYPE through a
    long-named directory component; CD into one and back, prompt
    canonicalized; all-lowercase typing matching mixed-case names;
    VER 0.11; REDTEST regression green throughout.

v0.10: redirection and pipes.
  - The kernel half is 21h/45h (DUP) and 46h (FORCEDUP), plus one
    structural change that is the actual mechanism: the CP/M-era
    console functions (01h 02h 06h-0Ch) no longer talk to the screen
    and keyboard - they go through HANDLES 0 and 1.  That is what
    real DOS does, and it is the entire trick of redirection: point
    handle 1 at a file and every 02h and 09h in every program lands
    in the file, with the program none the wiser.  std_in/std_out/
    std_write in INT21.INC are that routing; a device slot goes to
    IOS_CONIN/CONOUT exactly as before, so an unredirected system
    runs the same instructions it always did.
  - Handles are global-table slots here, so DUP cannot be DOS's
    shared-SFT-entry refcount.  It is a full COPY of the slot: the
    pair track the file independently afterwards.  Less than DOS
    promises, but redirection only ever uses DUP to PARK a standard
    handle while 46h lends the slot out, and a parked handle is not
    used - so the difference cannot be observed from where we stand.
    Revisit if JFT-per-PSP ever becomes real.
  - COMMAND's half is CMD\REDIR.INC: exec_line became a layer that
    peels < file, > file, >> file and | off the line (compacting it
    in place) before exec_core ever parses the verb.  Setup is the
    classic sequence: open/create the target, 45h to park the real
    handle 0 or 1 in a spare slot, 46h to install the file over it,
    close the opening handle.  Restore is 46h back the other way -
    and THAT close is what flushes the file and writes its directory
    entry.  The parked handles live on the exec stack, not statics:
    IF and FOR re-enter exec_line, and an inner run must not disturb
    an outer restore.
  - Tokens are stripped at the OUTERMOST level of a line, which is
    DOS's own ordering with DOS's own consequences, both verified:
    a false IF still creates its empty > target, and FOR's
    iterations all land in ONE open file rather than each reopening
    and truncating it.  Redirecting a .BAT invocation redirects only
    the launch, not the lines that later run from its frame - also
    what MS-DOS does.
  - Pipes are DOS pipes: sequential, through %PIPE1.$$$/%PIPE2.$$$
    in the current directory, alternating for multi-stage lines,
    deleted when the line is done.  Nothing runs concurrently;
    nothing ever did in DOS either.  ECHO Y | CHOICE /C:YN works
    end to end - CHOICE polls 06h and blocks on 08h, both of which
    now read the pipe file through handle 0.
  - 09h to a redirected stdout writes the whole '$' string as ONE
    block, because file_wchunk writes its cluster through on every
    call and DIR at a cluster write per character would be felt on
    real iron.  02h stays per-character write-through - correct
    first; a stdout buffer is future work if it ever matters.
  - EXIT > FILE ends the shell INSIDE the redirected run, so the
    restore never happens.  fn4C's shell path now closes whatever
    the standard slots hold (flushing that file) and re-marks them
    as CON before reloading the interpreter; the parked copies were
    shell-owned and go in the ordinary owner sweep.
  - TYPE < FILE answers "Required parameter missing" - authentic:
    TYPE takes its name from the command line and does not read
    stdin, in MS-DOS 6.22 just the same.  The input-redirection
    test that actually proves something is CHOICE < FILE.
  - wasm note: a dword access to a db-declared label needs an
    explicit size - "mov edx,[sft_tbl+SFT_POS]" is E039 until it
    says "dword ptr".  The EQU offset does not carry a size; the
    label's db does, and it wins.
  - COMMAND label prefixes rn_ rd_ pp_ el_ were already taken
    (RENAME, RD, put_prompt, exec_core's own lines) - REDIR.INC
    uses xl_ rdp_ rda_ rdr_ pip_ rx_.  With case-insensitive
    symbols, grep before you name.
  - Verified on all three platforms - DOSBox floppy (FAT12), DOSBox
    FAT32 hard disk, 86Box FAT16 over ATA: > >> creating and
    appending, DIR > FILE, CHOICE < FILE taking its answer from a
    file, ECHO Y | CHOICE, TYPE FILE | CHOICE, pipe temp files
    cleaned up, and VER reporting 0.10 from the kernel.

Renamed from DOS32 to PM-DOS on 2026-08-07, for Protected Mode DOS.
The tree is S:\CPP\PM-DOS, but the shared header, the floppy image and
the assembler identifiers are PMDOS.INC, PMDOS.IMG, PMDOS_DEBUG and
PMDOS_MAJOR/PMDOS_MINOR: a hyphen cannot appear in a symbol, and the
8.3 names read better without one.  The FAT OEM name and volume label
are "PM-DOS", which happened to fit the 8- and 11-byte fields exactly.
Re-verified after the rename: DOSBox 0.74 booting the floppy, the FAT16
hard disk and the FAT32 hard disk, and 86Box booting the FAT16 disk
over ATA - plus VER, DIR, VOL, and CHTEST.BAT running the external
CHOICE.COM and continuing afterwards.

v0.9: CONFIG.SYS, the first external command, and handle ownership.
  - CHOICE left COMMAND.COM and became CMD\CHOICE.ASM, a real
    external.  MS-DOS ships CHOICE.COM rather than building it in,
    and a command that needs no interpreter state has no business
    living in the shell.  It is also the first ordinary PM-DOS
    program: loaded into the transient slot by 21h/4Bh, arguments
    from the PSP command tail, exit through 21h/4Ch.
  - Making it external immediately exposed a real kernel bug.  PM-DOS
    has ONE global handle table and 4Ch closed every open handle in
    it, so a child terminating closed the SHELL's open batch file and
    the batch simply stopped after the first external command.  Every
    SFT entry now carries SFT_OWNER, stamped in sft_new - the single
    place a handle is ever claimed - and 4Ch closes only what the
    terminating PSP opened.  This is the JFT-per-PSP idea, minus the
    indirection: with one table, ownership has to be recorded
    somewhere, and pretending a shared table is private is how the
    bug happened.
  - DOS\CONFIG.INC processes CONFIG.SYS from the root of the boot
    drive, in the KERNEL, once, before the interpreter is loaded.
    That is the only place it can go: a SHELL= line decides which
    interpreter to load, so nothing running after the shell could
    honour it.  MS-DOS put this in IO.SYS for exactly the same
    reason.  The order falls out of it - CONFIG.SYS configures the
    system, the shell starts, the shell runs AUTOEXEC.BAT.
  - The file is read through our own INT 21h.  Everything in PM-DOS
    runs at ring 0 through one flat code selector, so an INT from
    kernel code builds the same frame a program's would: no stack
    switch, no special case, and no second copy of the file logic.
  - Statements are a table (cfg_table): a name and a handler taking
    ESI -> the value text.  Adding a statement is a row and a
    handler, with no second mechanism beside it.
  - EVERY statement a real DOS understands is recognised, and almost
    all of them do nothing.  The goal is compatibility: a CONFIG.SYS
    carried over from a real install must boot without a word of
    complaint, and a release build printing NOTHING for a full DOS
    CONFIG.SYS is the test.  Only an unrecognised statement is an
    error, which is what keeps a typo in a PM-DOS statement visible.
      SHELL=      real, and the one with teeth: replaces both the
                  interpreter path and its command tail.  Leaving
                  "/P" off is meaningful rather than a mistake - it
                  is how you get a shell that skips AUTOEXEC.BAT and
                  that EXIT can terminate.  shell_name and shell_tail
                  became buffers in DOSMAIN for this.
      BREAK=      remembered; nothing consults it until Ctrl-C exists
      REM, ;      comments; [blocks] are skipped, so a multi-config
                  file is read rather than rejected (every block is
                  read, none is chosen from - there is no menu yet)
      BUFFERS FILES LASTDRIVE FCBS STACKS COUNTRY SWITCHES NUMLOCK
      DOS DRIVPARM DEVICE DEVICEHIGH INSTALL INSTALLHIGH SET INCLUDE
      MENUITEM MENUDEFAULT MENUCOLOR SUBMENU COMMENT MULTITRACK
                  recognised, and doing nothing.  They describe
                  machinery PM-DOS does not have and mostly does not
                  want: it caches per volume rather than in BUFFERS,
                  has no FCBs, and is flat and unpaged, which makes
                  DOS=HIGH,UMB a statement about a memory model that
                  does not exist here.  A debug build lists them as
                  "(recognised, no effect)" so the silence is
                  checkable.
      anything else  "Unrecognized command in CONFIG.SYS", after
                  echoing the offending line.

    DEVICE= and DEVICEHIGH= are in the inert list for now and will
    not stay: they are what the 16-bit VDM will need, and the drivers
    named on those lines are exactly what it will be asked to load.

  - PM-DOS's own statements, parsed and RECORDED but not acted on -
    there is no paging subsystem yet, so paging_on / swap_kb /
    swap_perm are the settings, not the state.  The statement that
    turns a feature on is worth having before the feature does,
    rather than being retrofitted around it afterwards:

    [SUPERSEDED in v0.19: both statements are REMOVED.  The reasoning
    below was sound about swap files and wrong about CONFIG.SYS - a
    statement that accepts a setting nothing will ever read is a
    promise, not a record.  Kept here because it is the argument that
    v0.19 answers.]

      PAGING=ON|OFF
      SWAPFILESIZE=kilobytes[,PERMANENT|TEMPORARY]

    A permanent swap file is allocated once and kept - the
    386SPART.PAR idea, and the only way to guarantee the space is
    contiguous and actually there.  A temporary one is created at
    boot and deleted at shutdown, which is friendlier to a shared
    disk; it is the default, being the one that cannot strand disk
    space if the machine never comes back.  SWAPFILESIZE=0 is
    rejected rather than treated as OFF - that is what PAGING=OFF is
    for, and a size of zero is far more likely to be a mistake.
    Nothing is committed until the whole statement has parsed, so a
    bad qualifier cannot leave a size behind from a rejected line.
    A debug build reports the settled configuration.
  - TOOLS\MKDISK.C: the FAT32 root directory is now a real cluster
    CHAIN rather than a single cluster.  One cluster held spc*16 = 16
    entries, which a boot disk outgrows immediately (it did, mid-
    build).  Allocated contiguously from cluster 2 so a directory
    entry's byte offset still maps straight onto datalba.

  Verified in DOSBox 0.74 (floppy) and on 86Box (hard disk, ATA): a
  full DOS CONFIG.SYS - the whole inherited set plus multi-config
  blocks - processed in complete silence, with a lone typo the only
  thing reported; PAGING and SWAPFILESIZE parsed and recorded, both
  qualifiers and the unqualified default, with four bad parameter
  forms each rejected and nothing left behind by them; SHELL= without
  /P suppressing AUTOEXEC.BAT AND re-enabling EXIT; SHELL= naming a
  missing file giving "Bad or missing command interpreter";
  CHOICE.COM run from the prompt and from a batch file, with the
  batch CONTINUING afterwards and ERRORLEVEL arriving through the
  genuine 4Bh/4Dh path; FAT32 booting with a 14-entry root,
  fragmented and not.

v0.8: batch files, and a VER that tells the truth.
  - VER now asks the KERNEL what version the system is, through a new
    21h/F1h.  30h has to go on claiming DOS 5 so that ordinary
    programs recognise us, which left nothing there to report what
    IBMDOS.SYS actually is; and COMMAND.COM reporting its own number
    was answering a different question from the one asked.  They are
    separately built binaries and can differ, so when they do, VER
    says so on a second line.
  - CMD\BATCH.INC is the batch interpreter, to MS-DOS 6.22 parity:
    @, ECHO/ECHO., REM, PAUSE, :labels and GOTO, IF with ERRORLEVEL /
    EXIST / str1==str2 / NOT, FOR %v IN (set) DO (wildcards in the set
    expand), SHIFT, CALL, CHOICE, CTTY, %0-%9 and %VAR% substitution,
    and AUTOEXEC.BAT at startup.
  - The read-eval loop was split into get_line and exec_line.  That is
    the whole structural change: get_line takes a line from the batch
    file or the keyboard indifferently, and exec_line runs one command
    from anywhere - which is what lets IF and FOR feed a line straight
    back in, and CALL run a whole file, without a second parser.
  - A batch file's state is a frame: handle, file position, and its
    arguments.  The file POSITION is the program counter, so GOTO is
    just a store to it after a scan from the top - which is why a
    batch file can jump backwards as freely as forwards, and why the
    :ARGLOOP / SHIFT / GOTO ARGLOOP idiom works.
  - CALL stacks a frame; running a batch file WITHOUT call replaces
    the current one and never returns.  That difference is the entire
    reason CALL had to be invented, so both behaviours are real here
    rather than CALL being a synonym.
  - Every argument is kept, not just ten, and SHIFT moves a window
    over them.  MS-DOS lets SHIFT reach an eleventh argument that %9
    could never name, and sliding a ten-entry array down would have
    quietly thrown it away.
  - The kernel starts the shell with a "/P" tail, exactly as
    CONFIG.SYS's SHELL= line did.  It means run AUTOEXEC.BAT, and it
    means ignore EXIT - the permanent shell has nothing underneath it
    to go back to, which is what MS-DOS does too.
  - COMMAND keeps its OWN copy of the last exit code.  21h/4Dh clears
    the code as it reads it, but a run of consecutive IF ERRORLEVEL
    lines - the entire idiom - has to see the same number each time.
  - ECHO measures its text from one delimiter past the verb, not from
    the first non-blank, because batch files indent their output with
    leading spaces and eating them is not a kindness.

  Not at parity, and why: CTTY accepts CON and refuses anything else,
  because there is no device chain to move the console onto yet (it
  says so rather than pretending).  CHOICE is internal here; in 6.22
  it is CHOICE.COM, an external, and PM-DOS has no external command set
  to put it in yet.  There is no Ctrl-C, so no "Terminate batch job
  (Y/N)?" prompt.  Redirection and pipes are not implemented anywhere
  in COMMAND yet, batch or otherwise.

  Verified in DOSBox 0.74 (floppy, BIOS path) and on 86Box (hard disk,
  ATA path), with the same results on both: AUTOEXEC.BAT runs at boot;
  argument and environment substitution; forward and backward GOTO;
  the label-not-found case ending the file; IF in all three forms and
  negated; FOR over a list and over a wildcard, from a batch file and
  from the prompt; SHIFT reaching a twelfth argument; CALL returning
  and recursing; chaining NOT returning; CHOICE setting ERRORLEVEL for
  IF to read; and EXIT ignored by the permanent shell.  DISK\*.BAT are
  the test files and are written onto both the floppy and hard-disk
  images.

v0.7: an IDE/ATA driver, with the BIOS kept as a fallback.
  - IO\ATA.INC talks to the drive controller directly from protected
    mode.  That removes, per request: a switch to real mode, a PIC
    reprogram to 08h/70h, the INT 13h call, a reprogram back to
    50h/58h and a switch home - plus the XFER_BUF bounce and its
    16-sector chunking, because PIO reads land straight in the
    caller's flat 32-bit buffer.
  - Detection is by IDENTIFY DEVICE across both channels, master and
    slave.  Anything that does not answer is left to BLOCK.INC's BIOS
    path, which is what keeps DOSBox 0.74 - no IDE controller at all -
    working unchanged.  blk_read/blk_write ask ata_owns FIRST, so a
    genuine ATA failure is reported as a failure rather than being
    mistaken for "ask the BIOS instead".
  - LBA28/LBA48 when the drive offers it, plain CHS when it does not.
    CHS is not legacy decoration: the drive 86Box presents reports no
    LBA at all, and neither do real pre-1994 disks - which are
    squarely PM-DOS's target.
  - Interrupts are suppressed at the drive (nIEN) and transfers are
    polled, so no IRQ 14/15 handlers are needed.
  - BUILD ata builds with the probe tracing: a stage letter per slot,
    the IDENTIFY geometry, and an LBA 0 read-back self-test.

  Verified on 86Box (Pentium II / 440BX / PIIX4 IDE): boots to C:\>
  through the driver, MD/COPY/TYPE work, and the writes were then
  confirmed present in the raw image file on the host.  DOSBox 0.74
  still boots and does cross-drive copies on the BIOS path.

v0.6: a FAT-walking loader, and a FAT32 boot sector.
  - BOOT\FATLOAD.INC is one real-mode FAT12/16/32 file loader, shared
    by the hard-disk stage 2 (which loads IBMIO.SYS) and by IBMIO
    itself (which loads IBMDOS.SYS).  It finds a file by name in the
    root - fixed area or FAT32 root chain, whichever the volume has -
    and follows its cluster chain.  NOTHING has to be contiguous any
    more, on any filesystem.
  - The FAT is windowed TWO sectors at a time.  Two rather than one
    because a FAT12 entry can straddle a sector boundary: with the
    next sector already in the buffer, the word read at offset 511
    simply spills into it and needs no special case at all.  The
    same window then serves FAT16 and FAT32 unchanged.
  - The volume boot record became STAGE 1 and does nothing but read
    stage 2 out of the partition's reserved sectors and jump to it.
    This is not a shortcut, it is arithmetic: a FAT32 VBR has 420
    bytes left after its 5Ah-byte BPB, and the walker measured 690.
    Microsoft hit the same wall and put their FAT32 boot record's
    continuation in sector 2 of the reserved area.  Stage 2 lives in
    reserved sectors rather than in a file so that nothing has to be
    found before the FAT walker exists.
  - BOOT\BOOTHD.ASM assembles twice - plain for FAT16 (code at 3Eh,
    stage 2 at reserved sector 1, rsvd raised to 9) and with
    -dFAT32BOOT for FAT32 (code at 5Ah, stage 2 at reserved sector 9,
    clear of FSInfo at 1 and the backup boot sector at 6).  Stage 2
    (BOOT\BOOT2.ASM) is ONE binary for both: FATLOAD works the FAT
    width out from the cluster count at run time.
  - IBMIO's load_dos is now ~60 lines around the same include, and
    handles FAT12/16/32 identically; the old hand-rolled FAT12 chain
    walk and its contiguous-FAT16 special case are gone.
  - MKDISK grew -s2 (install stage 2), FAT32 -vbr (splicing at 5Ah
    instead of 3Eh), and -frag, which deliberately scatters every
    file across ALTERNATE clusters.  MKHD.CMD frag builds such a
    disk; a loader that reads straight through cannot survive it.

  Verified in DOSBox: FAT16 and FAT32 hard disks both boot to C:\>
  with no floppy attached; both still boot when built with -frag, so
  the walker is genuinely following 2 -> 4 -> 6 -> 8 chains; the
  floppy still boots (its FAT12 chain now goes through the shared
  loader too); and from a FAT32 boot, a FAT16 second disk mounts,
  reads and takes cross-drive copies.

v0.5: booting from a hard disk.
  - BOOT\MBRBOOT.ASM: a real master boot record.  Relocates itself to
    0060:0000 (so the volume boot record can load at 7C00 where it
    expects to be), finds the active partition entry, reads its first
    sector with the CHS values from the entry itself, and chains to it.
  - BOOT\BOOT16.ASM: a FAT16 volume boot record.  It does NOT walk the
    FAT - a FAT16 FAT is up to 128 sectors and there is nowhere in low
    memory to put it - so it finds IBMIO.SYS in the root directory by
    name and reads it CONTIGUOUSLY from its start cluster.  MKDISK
    writes files sequentially into a freshly formatted image, so that
    holds by construction; it is the same bargain IO.SYS always made.
    Full CHS packing (cylinder bits 8-9 into CL bits 6-7) and the
    partition's hidden-sector count folded into every LBA.
  - IBMIO's load_dos grew a hard-disk path on the same terms: for
    drives 80h+ it reads IBMDOS.SYS contiguously in XFER_SIZE chunks
    instead of walking a FAT12 chain, and every LBA now includes the
    BPB's hidden-sector count.  Floppies keep the FAT12 chain walk.
  - MKDISK: -mbr <file> and -vbr <file> install boot code into a hard
    disk image (the MBR's first 1BEh bytes; the VBR's jump plus its
    code from 3Eh up, so the BPB stays MKDISK's), mark the partition
    active, write a real CHS end field, add a volume label entry, and
    flag the first two files System+Hidden+ReadOnly.  MKHD.CMD now
    builds HD16.IMG bootable, with the system files on it.
  - 4Eh/4Fh finally honour the DOS attribute rule: hidden and system
    files stay out of a directory search unless asked for, so DIR no
    longer lists IBMIO.SYS and IBMDOS.SYS.  Lookups by name (open,
    exec, path walking) are unaffected - they pass srch_attr without
    the internal SRCH_FILTER bit and still see everything.

  Verified in DOSBox: "boot -l c" reaches C:\> with no floppy present
  at all; MD/CD/COPY/TYPE on the boot volume; EXIT reloads
  C:\COMMAND.COM; A: and D: still mount and take cross-drive copies;
  and a later floppy boot reads back what the hard-disk boot wrote.

v0.4: per-drive state and quiet release boots.
  - Every drive (A: B: C: D:) keeps its own live volume: the mount
    state, FAT caches (dirty flags included) and current directory
    live in a single vol_state block that vol_select swaps in and out
    of per-drive slots (vol_slots, 4 x 8872 bytes inside IBMDOS.SYS).
    Caches keyed by absolute LBA / cluster number (sec_buf, clus_buf,
    the dir-walk cache) are invalidated on a swap instead of saved -
    two disks can answer to the same LBA.  A parked volume's dirty
    FAT sectors are NOT flushed by the swap; they come back exactly
    as they were, the same as if no switch had happened.
  - resolve_core maps a "C:" prefix (or its absence, meaning the
    default drive) through vol_select, mounting on first touch and
    retrying failed mounts, so a path reaches the right disk no
    matter where you stand.  cwd is per volume: CD C:\WORK from A:
    changes where C: will land when you switch to it.
  - The SFT grew a drive field (SFT_DRIVE, SFT_LEN now 40).  Opens
    and creates stamp it; reads, writes and closes vol_select it
    first.  COPY A:\X C:\Y therefore just works - the two handles
    pull the volumes back and forth per chunk, dirty caches and all
    (verified with a 64K file A: -> C: -> D:, byte-identical).
  - 56h rename refuses to cross volumes (ERR_NOTSAME, 11h) - a
    rename never copies data.  36h and 47h take the drive in DL
    (0 = default, 1 = A:) like real DOS.  0Eh mounts before it
    adopts, so a dead drive leaves the default alone.
  - The shell reload path is "X:\COMMAND.COM" with the boot drive
    letter patched in at startup - EXIT on D: still finds it.
  - Release builds boot like the real thing: ONE line, "Starting
    PM-DOS...", and nothing else.  As of 0.29 the two that came before
    it are gone - the boot sector's "PM-DOS loading... ok" and PMIO's
    real-mode copy of the banner - because con_init clears the screen
    the moment protected mode is entered, so both were lines the user
    watched scroll away.  COMMAND.COM's banner went with them: it is
    printed by cmd_entry, which runs again on every reload of the
    shell slot, so it appeared on every EXIT as well as at boot.  VER
    reports the version, which is where a version belongs.  BUILD.CMD
    debug (-dPMDOS_DEBUG) brings back the stub and kernel banners and
    the mount messages.  Errors print in both: a boot sector that
    fails, or a machine that never reaches protected mode, still has
    its own voice.
  - COMMAND: DIR/VOL take a drive argument for the label, free-space
    and header lines ("Directory of C:\..." now names the LISTED
    drive and its cwd); put_cwd passes DL=0 explicitly - 47h reads
    DL now, and a stale register there is an invalid-drive error.

v0.3: subdirectories and FAT16/FAT32.
  - FAT.INC rewritten for all three FAT widths.  Cluster numbers are
    32-bit everywhere.  FAT12 keeps its whole-FAT cache (entries
    straddle sectors); FAT16/32 go through a one-sector FAT cache
    with lazy write-back to every copy (fatsec_buf).
  - Directories are enumerated through a context (dc_isroot/dc_start)
    that hides "fixed FAT12/16 root area" vs "cluster chain" (subdirs
    everywhere, and the FAT32 root).  dir_seek caches its chain walk;
    chain directories grow a zeroed cluster when they fill.
  - PATH.INC: paths normalize into an array of 8.3 components
    (absolute vs cwd-relative, "." / ".." folded), then walk from the
    root.  resolve_parent / resolve_dir / cwd_install / cwd_string.
    Current directory is per-mount, reset on drive change.
  - New INT 21h: 39h MKDIR (builds "." / ".." dot entries), 3Ah RMDIR
    (empty check, refuses the cwd), 3Bh CHDIR, real 47h.  4Eh/4Fh
    carry the searched directory in the DTA (start dd at +0Fh, isroot
    at +13h).  56h can move files between directories (directories
    rename in place only - moving one would orphan its "..").  0Eh
    accepts A: B: C: D: and falls back to the old volume if the new
    one will not mount.
  - Drives 80h+ read an MBR and mount the first used partition.
    FAT type is picked by cluster count (the MS rule), not the label.
  - COMMAND.COM: MD/CD/RD wired to 39h/3Bh/3Ah, CD alone prints the
    cwd, $P renders the real path, DIR of a directory name lists its
    contents (arg + "\*.*"), DEL glues the argument's directory part
    onto the names findfirst returns, volume labels looked up with
    an absolute "\*.*".
  - MKDISK grew -hd16/-hd32 modes: MBR + formatted FAT16/FAT32
    hard-disk images (63 spt, 16 heads); MKHD.CMD builds the two
    test images and NOTES the imgmount lines.
  Verified in DOSBox on all three: nested MD/CD, COPY across dirs
  and drives' paths, TYPE, DEL with paths, RD guards, persistence
  across remounts.  One-volume-at-a-time still (no cross-drive COPY).

v0.2 (same day): the shell moved out of IBMDOS into a real external
COMMAND.COM, which required growing the kernel three ways:
  - D32 executable format + INT 21h/4Bh EXEC, PSP, program slots
    (see "Programs" below)
  - FAT12 WRITE support: 3Ch create/truncate, 40h file writes (and
    the CX=0 truncate-at-position rule), 41h delete, 56h rename,
    close-time directory/FAT flush
  - 2Bh/2Dh set date/time (RTC via the thunk), 4Eh/4Fh attribute
    filtering (CX=08h finds the volume label), AH=F0h console
    extension (AL=0 CLS, 1/2 get/set cursor)
CMD\COMMAND.ASM implements: BREAK CD CLS COPY DATE DEL DIR ECHO ERASE
EXIT MD MEM PATH PAUSE PROMPT RD REM REN RENAME SET TIME TYPE VER
VERIFY VOL, drive changes, $-code PROMPT rendering, a 1K environment
block, and EXEC fallback (VERB.COM then VERB.EXE) for externals.
MD/CD/RD print an honest "not supported yet" (no subdirectories).

Programs (the D32 format)
-------------------------
A D32 file IS its memory image: 32-byte header (a 16-bit JMP SHORT,
then the magic 'D32',1Ah, load base, entry, bss size, stack hint)
followed by the code; the loader streams the whole file to the base
and zeroes BSS after it.  The jump at byte zero is for real MS-DOS,
which loads a file with no MZ signature as a .COM whatever it is
called and executes it from the front: it goes to a stub at 20h that
says the program needs 32-bit DOS mode and exits.  See v0.29.
Two fixed slots: shell at 141000h (PSP 140000h, ESP 180000h) and
transient at 181000h (PSP 180000h, ESP 200000h); a program's header
base must match the slot it is loaded into, and image bases are
4K-aligned because of the wlink offset rounding.  EXEC is one level
deep: COMMAND can run a program, programs cannot EXEC yet.  The PSP
starts with INT 20h and EXEC pushes the PSP address, so a plain RET
terminates, like it always has.  Tail at PSP+80h, DOS format.
Termination closes and flushes every non-standard handle.  When the
SHELL slot terminates, the kernel reloads COMMAND.COM from disk
("Bad or missing command interpreter" + retry if it cannot).

Two kernel files in the classic PC-DOS split, but the API runs in
32-bit flat protected mode:

  PMIO.SYS   hardware layer.  Real-mode stub (A20, memory sizing,
             loads PMDOS above 1M through unreal mode, enters
             protected mode) + 32-bit body (console at B8000h, PS/2
             keyboard, PIC, IDT, BIOS disk I/O through a PM->RM
             thunk).  Exports a flat call table at 22010h.
  PMDOS.SYS  DOS layer.  Memory arena, read-only FAT12 driver,
             INT 21h dispatcher (28 functions), built-in shell
             standing in for COMMAND.COM.

Everything PMDOS knows about hardware goes through the PMIO service
table; the two binaries are linked independently.

Layout
------
  BOOT\BOOT.ASM     FAT12 floppy boot sector (CHS INT 13h).  Finds
                    PMIO.SYS in the root dir, loads it at 2000:0000.
  BOOT\MBRBOOT.ASM  master boot record: relocate, find the active
                    partition, chain to its boot sector.
  BOOT\BOOTHD.ASM   hard-disk volume boot record, stage 1.  Assembles
                    twice: FAT16, and FAT32 with -dFAT32BOOT.  Loads
                    stage 2 out of the reserved sectors.
  BOOT\BOOT2.ASM    hard-disk stage 2: loads PMIO.SYS by chain.
                    One binary for FAT16 and FAT32.
  BOOT\FATLOAD.INC  the shared real-mode FAT12/16/32 file loader,
                    included by BOOT2.ASM and by IO\IORM.ASM.
  IO\IORM.ASM       real-mode stub, first 8K of PMIO.SYS exactly.
                    Owns the GDT (offset C00h) and globals (F00h).
                    pm2rm thunk entry is at fixed offset 0010h.
                    Loaded at 2000:0000, relocates itself to 0B00:0000
                    and blits IOPM above 1MB before entering PM.
  IO\IOPM.ASM       32-bit body (+ EXCEPT/PAGING/NULLTRAP/VM86/CONSOLE
                    /KEYBD/RMCALL/ATA/BLOCK .INC), linked at 200000h
                    and concatenated after IORM - loaded low, run high.
  IO\NULLTRAP.INC   the null-pointer guard: four debug registers, not
                    a guard page.  The comment at the top is the
                    argument for why page zero cannot be unmapped in
                    a kernel that shares an address space with the
                    BIOS data area, InDOS and the real-mode IVT.
  DOS\DOSMAIN.ASM   PMDOS.SYS (+ ARENA/FAT/INT21 .INC),
                    linked at 100000h.
  DOS\CONFIG.INC    CONFIG.SYS: reader, parser and statement table.
                    Add PM-DOS's own statements to cfg_table.
  CMD\COMMAND.ASM   COMMAND.COM, a D32 executable linked at 141000h.
  CMD\BATCH.INC     the batch interpreter: frames, line fetch and
                    substitution, GOTO/IF/FOR/SHIFT/CALL/CTTY.
  CMD\REDIR.INC     redirection and pipes: exec_line, the layer that
                    strips < > >> | off a line and points handles
                    0/1 before exec_core sees the verb.
  CMD\CHOICE.ASM    CHOICE.COM, the first EXTERNAL command, linked at
                    181000h - the transient slot, like any program.
                    MORE, SORT, SYS, FORMAT, LFNAPI and MEM followed
                    it there; all link at the same address, because
                    only one of them runs at a time.
  CMD\MEM.ASM       MEM.EXE, the memory report.  The one program that
                    reads kernel structures directly - it walks the
                    arena from the header 52h hands it, which is what
                    MEM always did and why 52h exists.  It walks the
                    conventional chain at V86_TPA too, which is where
                    the 588K figure can be seen from a running system.
  DISK\CONFIG.SYS   a test CONFIG.SYS that deliberately trips the
                    error paths.  SHELL= is not in it: the same file
                    goes on the floppy (A:) and both hard disks (C:).
  DISK\*.BAT        batch test files, written onto every disk image
                    by BUILD.CMD and MKHD.CMD.  BATTEST is the broad
                    one; GOTOTEST, LOOPTEST, SHIFT12, CHAIN1/CHAIN2
                    and NOLABEL each pin down one behaviour.
  INC\PMDOS.INC     the one shared header: memory map, selectors,
                    service table offsets, SFT layout, error codes.
  TOOLS\MKDISK.C    builds the bootable 1.44M FAT12 image, and the
                    FAT16/FAT32 hard disks (bootable with -mbr/-vbr).
  BUILD.CMD         assembles, links, checks sizes, makes PMDOS.IMG.
  MKHD.CMD          makes BIN\HD16.IMG (bootable FAT16) + HD32.IMG.

Memory map: see the big comment at the top of INC\PMDOS.INC.

Build
-----
  BUILD.CMD        release: boots with "Starting PM-DOS..." only
  BUILD.CMD debug  defines PMDOS_DEBUG: chatty stub/kernel banners,
                   mount and load messages (errors print either way)
  (Open Watcom 1.9 wasm+wlink+wcl386 on PATH)

Raw binaries come from  wlink form raw bin option offset=<base>.
Watch out: wlink silently rounds a non-4K-aligned offset UP (that is
why the boot sector addresses everything through DS=07C0h and links
at offset 0).  The sources use MASM-compatible syntax and should
assemble with ML 6.1x as well, but that path is untested - no MASM
on this machine.

Testing
-------
DOSBox 0.74 boots the image:  dosbox -conf <conf with:
  [cpu] core=normal cycles=30000
  [autoexec] imgmount a BIN\PMDOS.IMG -t floppy / boot -l a >
cycles=max starves DOSBox's event pump (window goes Not Responding);
use fixed cycles.  Verified 2026-08-06 in DOSBox: boot, VER, DIR,
MEM, TYPE README.TXT - i.e. keyboard IRQ, INT 21h, FAT12 reads and
the PM->RM BIOS thunk all live.  86Box (C:\86Box) is the closer-to-
hardware second opinion when needed.  NOT YET TRIED ON REAL IRON, and
as of the v0.30 audit that is the largest single unknown left in the
project: two emulators agreeing is two opinions, not a fact.  SYS16.COM
is the way in - it runs on an ordinary MS-DOS and writes a bootable
PM-DOS disk - and it was confirmed current in v0.29 by finding all four
boot blobs in the built binary.

v0.31 SHARPENED THAT FROM A PRINCIPLE INTO A SPECIFIC DEBT.  The null
guard is four debug registers, and neither emulator implements data
breakpoints - not DOSBox 0.74, not 86Box 4.2.1 in either of its cores.
DR7 reads back exactly as written on both and nothing ever fires.  So
there is now a feature in the kernel that no amount of emulator work
can test, and CRASH /N on iron is the first thing to run.  Note the
shape of that: the emulators did not disagree, they were both missing
the same thing, which is the failure mode "two opinions" was always
about.

ALSO WORTH RUNNING ON IRON, for the same reason - they touch hardware
the emulators model loosely or not at all:
  - 21h/03h, 04h and 05h against a machine with a REAL serial port and
    a REAL printer.  Both emulators here have neither, so all v0.31
    proved is that the calls return rather than hang, which is the
    less interesting half
  - IDLETEST, because the INT 28h excursion rate is set by how fast
    the machine can go round a V86 exit and re-entry, and that is a
    number an emulator has no reason to get right
  - the raw-mode console (4401h), because it changes how keys arrive
    and a real keyboard controller is the one that matters

Every release is checked on BOTH: DOSBox for the FAT12 floppy path
and 86Box for the FAT16 hard disk over real ATA.  v0.20 added a third
kind of check that neither emulator can be talked into on demand -
a DISK THAT WILL NOT READ - and got it for free from the drives
neither of them has: DIR B: under DOSBox (no second floppy), DIR D:
and DIR A: under 86Box (no second hard disk, and a floppy controller
whose unit 00h has never worked here).  Between them they cover both
sides of the FFh rule and all four answers.
v0.21 added a fourth: the 40MB FAT32 image mounted as a DATA drive
(imgmount 2 BIN\HD32.IMG -size 512,63,16,81 then boot the floppy) is
the only volume here with more than 65535 clusters, so it is the only
place 7303h can be told apart from 36h - it reports 40,962,048 bytes
free where 36h saturates at 33,553,920.  A fix nobody can see fail
without it is a fix nobody has tested.
SYS16 added a fifth kind of check, and the only one that needs an OS
other than ours: a REAL MS-DOS, booted from the MSDOS6 disk in the
PRESARIO backups.  DOSBox's own DOS cannot stand in for it - see the
SYS16 section - so anything that leans on INT 25h/26h or on file
attributes has to be run there.
The regression set is BATTEST, CHTEST, REDTEST, CMDTEST, LFNTEST,
LFNAPI, CTRLC.BAT and DIR | SORT | MORE, plus whichever throwaway
prober the release needed
(scratchpad EXECTEST.ASM for v0.18's nesting, PSPTEST.ASM for v0.19's
PSP and memory work).  Both probers earned their keep by finding
things a build cannot: EXECTEST the i21_fail stack bug, PSPTEST
nothing in the kernel but its own immediate-vs-dereference mistake -
and MEM.EXE, just by existing, the MORE page-boundary bug.

v0.30 added three that are PERMANENT rather than throwaway, because
what they cover is foundation and will keep needing to be true:
DEVTEST.COM (the device namespace, InDOS, extended error and file
stamps, all from inside a DOS box so the VDM bridge is exercised
too), NULTEST.BAT (the same devices through COMMAND's own
redirection, which is where "> NUL" actually goes) and CRASHTST.BAT
with CRASH.EXE (a native program faulting three different ways inside
a batch file that has to survive it).  DEVTEST found a bug in this
release's own code within an hour of being written - see the v0.30
notes - which is the argument for spending the hour.

v0.31 added two more of the same kind.  APITEST.COM covers the whole
release from inside a DOS box - both version calls, six IOCTL
subfunctions, 5Ah, 5Bh, 60h, 68h, 2Eh/54h and 05h - and is worth
running BOTH WAYS, because "APITEST > FILE" makes stdout a file and
4400h/4401h are the two calls whose answer is supposed to change when
it is.  APITEST.BAT does both.  IDLETEST.COM hooks INT 28h and counts
how often its handler runs while it waits for a key, which is the only
way to see the idle hook at all; it is interactive by nature, so it is
not in a batch file.

Both earned their keep immediately.  APITEST found the ".."-at-the-
root bug in a resolver four releases old, and CRASH's new /N found
that the whole null-guard question needed rethinking (see v0.31).

Design notes / traps hit
------------------------
* A CALL THAT RETURNS IN BX, INSERTED ABOVE CODE THAT WAS USING BX.
  VER asks 21h/F100h for the kernel version in BX, prints it, and then
  compares it against what COMMAND was built with.  v0.31 added "and
  print what 30h says" in between - and 30h RETURNS IN BX too (BH is
  the OEM byte).  VER then reported a version mismatch on a system
  where both halves matched perfectly, which is the worst kind of
  wrong: a diagnostic lying about the thing it exists to check.  The
  giveaway was that the message it printed was one nothing should
  ever have made it print.
* $-TERMINATED AND NUL-TERMINATED ARE NOT INTERCHANGEABLE, and the
  failure is spectacular rather than subtle.  APITEST printed the
  buffers 5Ah and 60h fill using 21h/09h, which stops at a '$' - and
  those calls hand back ASCIIZ, because the whole handle-era API deals
  in ASCIIZ.  09h ran off the end of the string, through the rest of
  the program, and out into the leftover directory sectors sitting in
  memory, printing the floppy's root directory across the screen.  It
  looked like a kernel bug in the file system for a good ten minutes.
  Test programs need a putz as well as a puts.
* AN EMULATOR CAN IMPLEMENT A REGISTER WITHOUT IMPLEMENTING WHAT IT
  DOES.  DR7 written, DR7 read back identical, breakpoints never fire
  - on DOSBox 0.74 and on 86Box 4.2.1 in both its cores.  The reason
  this cost so little time is that the read-back diagnostic was added
  BEFORE the second emulator was tried: "armed and did not fire" is
  ambiguous, "DDDD06AA is in DR7 and it did not fire" is not.  When a
  feature depends on something an emulator might not model, build the
  question "did our write land?" into the test from the start.
* THE 86Box VM DIRECTORY HAS ITS OWN COPIES OF THE DISK IMAGES.
  86box.cfg names HD16.IMG relative to C:\86Box\VMs\PM-DOS, not to
  BIN, so a rebuilt image is not a re-tested image - MKHD must be
  followed by a copy into the VM directory.  Half an hour went into
  wondering why a fix had not taken effect before VER said "PM-DOS
  version 0.30" and settled it.  When an emulator seems to be running
  old code, it is running old code.
* A ROUTINE MAY NOT SHARE A NAME WITH AN EQUATE, EVEN IN A DIFFERENT
  CASE.  wasm folds symbol case, so "sft_devid:" collided with the
  SFT_DEVID field offset and came out as E038 "Unexpected colon" -
  which names the line but not the reason.  Renamed to sft_dev.  This
  is the same family as the other wasm traps below and the same fix:
  when an error makes no sense, look for the symbol twice.
* DO NOT LOAD A SCRATCH VALUE THROUGH EAX NEAR THE END OF A HANDLER.
  f3C_stamp returns the handle in AX, and a "mov eax,[open_stamp]"
  added four lines above "mov [ebp+F_EAX],ax" made every create hand
  back the file's packed time and date instead - with CF clear, so
  the caller believed it.  The frame slot is written LAST in most of
  these handlers, which makes the window wide and quiet.
* A NULL POINTER IS NOT A FAULT HERE.  Linear zero is the real-mode
  IVT, it is mapped, and a D32 program is at ring 0 - so CRASH.EXE's
  first version scribbled on the interrupt table and carried on.
  Testing a fault handler needs an address that is genuinely
  unmapped: PG_MAXTAB covers the first 256MB, so F0000000h will do.
* 86BOX REMEMBERS A WINDOW POSITION FROM A MONITOR YOU NO LONGER
  HAVE.  Its window came up at x = -1644 and every screenshot showed
  the desktop, with the process running and the title bar correct.
  SetWindowPos it on-screen before deciding the emulator is broken.
* A FAULT OUT OF V86 MODE ARRIVES WITH DS, ES, FS AND GS NULLED.  The
  CPU does that on purpose on the way to a protected-mode handler, so
  the handler cannot be handed the guest's 16-bit segments and quietly
  use them.  exc_common did not reload them, so the first thing that
  touched memory through DS - the lodsb inside con_str - took a second
  #GP on a null selector, arrived back at exc_common, faulted again,
  and TRIPLE-FAULTED THE MACHINE.  The symptom is the worst kind: no
  output at all and an instant reboot, over and over, roughly every
  seven seconds.  irq_common had reloaded DS/ES since it was written,
  which is the clue that this was an oversight rather than a design.
  DOSBox 0.74 does not null those registers on the transition, so it
  ran the VDM perfectly throughout - see the next entry.
* AND THE TESTBED THAT WAS NOT TESTING ANYTHING.  86Box had been
  booting HD16.IMG, not the floppy image being rebuilt and copied in
  before every run, so for a whole session it was running a build
  several versions old - one that still had V86_TRACE compiled in and
  predated the NT fix.  That old build reboot-looped, which was read
  as "86Box is hanging in POST" and written off as an emulator fault.
  It was not: the POST screens at 40s, 65s and 170s were DIFFERENT
  POSTs.  Two lessons, and the second is the real one:
    - ONE SCREENSHOT CANNOT TELL A HANG FROM A REBOOT.  Sample
      repeatedly (scratchpad catch86.ps1) and compare frames; a
      machine that is looping shows the video BIOS again eventually.
    - MAKE THE TESTBED PROVE WHICH BUILD IT IS RUNNING.  A version
      banner is not enough when the version has not been bumped.
  MKHD.CMD now puts HELLO.COM and HELLOX.EXE on the hard disks too,
  and the VDM self-test opens "\HELLO.COM" with no drive letter so it
  works whichever volume the machine booted from.
* A BUFFER CAN BE WHERE THE CODE READING IT IS ABOUT TO LIVE.  Moving
  PMIO down to 0B00:0000 put the relocated stub exactly on FL_FATBUF
  (0000B000h), and the new transient program area exactly on FL_DIRBUF
  (0000D000h).  Nothing complains about that at build time - the
  addresses are EQUs in one header and the stub is a raw binary - and
  the failure would have been the FAT window overwriting the very code
  that was reading it, on the first cluster of the first file.  The
  lesson is that a memory-map change means re-reading every EQU that
  names a fixed address, not just the ones being edited.
* A TEST THAT THE ASSEMBLER OPTIMISES AWAY IS NOT A TEST.  HELLOX's
  first draft made its far call inside its only code segment; wasm
  turned it into a near call, the linker emitted ONE fixup for the
  whole program, and the relocation loop the file existed to exercise
  never ran more than a single iteration.  Nothing failed - it just
  was not testing anything.  Counting the fixups in the built binary
  (crlc in the MZ header) is what caught it, and the rewrite with a
  second code segment and a table of far pointers took it to seven.
  For anything that only breaks at scale, check the artefact, not the
  source.
* IRET WITH NT SET IS A TASK SWITCH, and it cost the first evening of
  the VDM.  The IRETD that should have entered V86 mode raised
  exception 0Ah - invalid TSS - with error code 0, because the CPU had
  followed the back-link field at the front of our TSS, found the zero
  we left there, and tried to switch to it.  Nothing sets NT on
  purpose; it arrives from whatever the BIOS left in FLAGS before the
  switch to protected mode.  v86_run now clears it, and the guest is
  not allowed to own it either - a guest that could set NT could
  arrange a task switch out of its own IRET.
* AND THE EMULATOR THAT CANNOT SAY SO.  DOSBox 0.74 met that same
  IRETD by exiting - no message, exit code 0, an empty stdout.txt, a
  black window.  86Box printed "*** CPU exception 0A at 00022595 err
  00000000" and the fix followed in minutes.  V86 is exactly the sort
  of thing DOSBox approximates, so the rule from here on is: the VDM
  is developed against 86Box and only regression-checked on DOSBox.
  (DOSBox does run the V86 monitor correctly now that NT is clear -
  it was the task switch it could not face, not V86 itself.)
* A SCREENSHOT HARNESS MUST CHECK WHAT IT PHOTOGRAPHED.  A stale or
  not-yet-mapped window handle gives a rectangle somewhere on the
  desktop, and the wallpaper at those coordinates looked exactly like
  a black emulator screen - which sent this hunt after a crash that
  had already been fixed.  shot.ps1 now reads the window title back
  and refuses anything that does not say DOSBox.  shot86.ps1 had the
  title check but not the TOPMOST forcing, and caught the same
  wallpaper again on 2026-08-08; a background process cannot take the
  foreground, so SetForegroundWindow alone is not enough.  Both scripts
  now do SetWindowPos(HWND_TOPMOST) first.
* 86BOX'S AWARD BIOS CAN HANG IN POST at "Detecting Secondary Slave",
  before the boot sector is ever read, and when it does it stays hung
  for as long as you are willing to wait - three minutes was not
  enough.  It has nothing to do with PM-DOS.  Removing the CD-ROM does
  not help (the empty channel still times out) and neither does
  clearing the NVR; SendKeys cannot deliver the F4 the BIOS offers,
  because 86Box only takes keyboard input with real focus.  When it
  starts doing this, the day's testing moves to DOSBox.
* WASM SYMBOLS ARE CASE-INSENSITIVE, so a label called vdm_test
  collides with the BUILD define VDM_TEST, and the error is
  "syntax error: unexpected colon" pointing at the label.  Same family
  as the gv_x/GV_X collision; the build define namespace and the label
  namespace are one namespace.
* WLINK ROUNDS "option offset=" UP TO THE NEXT 4K.  Every other
  offset in this project is already 4K-aligned - 200000h, 100000h,
  141000h, 181000h - so it never showed.  A .COM asks for 100h, gets
  built for 1000h, is loaded by DOS at 100h anyway, and every
  absolute address in it points 3840 bytes too high: it assembles, it
  links, it runs into nothing.  "form dos com" is no better, it emits
  the ORG 100h gap as 256 leading zero bytes.  The incantation that
  works is ORG 0 in the source plus
      wlink form raw bin name x.com file x.obj order clname CODE offset=0x100
  ORDER places the class without rounding it.
* AN EMULATOR THAT ANSWERS "YES" AND DOES NOTHING is worse than one
  that refuses.  DOSBox 0.74's INT 25h clears carry and leaves the
  buffer untouched, so SYS16's first run under it reported the target
  was "not a disk this can write to" - a message about the emulator,
  printed by our code, blaming the disk.  The 24-byte hex dump that
  settled it took five minutes and is now a permanent build switch.
  Same class of thing: DOSBox's DOS_SetFileAttr does not set
  attributes, so 4301h appears to fail there and works on real DOS.
* DOSBOX BUFFERS WRITES TO MOUNTED DISK IMAGES and only flushes them
  when it shuts down cleanly.  A harness that screenshots and then
  kills the process gets an image with some of the guest's writes in
  it and not others, which imitates a partly-working program very
  convincingly.  CloseMainWindow and wait, never Stop-Process -Force.
* MS-DOS DOES NOT TAKE A HARD DISK'S GEOMETRY FROM ITS BPB.  It works
  the layout out from the PARTITION SIZE using the same rules its own
  FORMAT uses, and a partition whose BPB says something else is read
  through the wrong layout - silently, because every sector number it
  computes is still inside the partition.  Bisected under MS-DOS 6.0,
  one field at a time, and it is worth reading the order because the
  first two answers were both wrong:
    - reserved 9 vs 1 (the only difference between an MKDISK -active
      image and a plain one): NO EFFECT on the geometry.  It only
      makes CHKDSK print "Probable non-DOS disk", which is CHKDSK
      peeking at the boot sector on its own - the driver never
      looked.  This was the first explanation and it was wrong.
    - the sector count moved from tot32 into tot16 where the spec
      says it belongs when it fits: NO EFFECT either.  Wrong twice.
    - what MS-DOS's own FORMAT writes for the same 65457-sector
      partition: spc 4, reserved 1, spf 64, tot16 65457, tot32 0 -
      which is EXACTLY the layout it had been using to read our disks
      all along.  MKDISK writes spc 2, spf 128.  That is the whole
      story: 1024-byte clusters where MS-DOS insists on 2048.
  So a PM-DOS FAT16 hard disk is not "rejected" by MS-DOS, it is
  MISREAD by it, which is worse.  Floppies are unaffected - DOS reads
  a floppy's BPB properly, because the media can change under it -
  and that is why SYS16 works there.
  Two divergences, and they are not equally hard.  The cluster size
  is just MKDISK's choice and could be made to follow MS-DOS's table.
  The nine reserved sectors cannot: MS-DOS puts the first FAT at
  volume sector 1, which is exactly where stage 2 lives.  If that
  ever matters, the way out is probably to move stage 2 OFF the
  partition entirely, into the 62 unused sectors between the MBR and
  the partition start, which is where every other boot loader on the
  planet keeps its middle stage.  Nothing needs deciding yet - PM-DOS
  reads its own disks perfectly - but it is the shape of the fix.
* A ROUTINE CALLED FROM THE MIDDLE OF A LOOP MUST NOT SHARE A BUFFER
  WITH THE LOOP, and after an INT 21h no register is yours.  MORE's
  pager read its keystroke into the same one-byte buffer mo_put was
  about to write the pending character from, and came back with AL
  holding the byte count of its last write - so the character on the
  page boundary vanished and a count appeared in its place.  Invisible
  for as long as the boundary happened to land somewhere harmless;
  adding one file to the disk moved it onto a letter.
* AN UNINSTALLED SOFTWARE INTERRUPT IS NOT A NO-OP, IT IS A LIE.
  PMIO fills all 256 IDT gates with a bare IRETD so a stray INT does
  no harm - which is right until something starts CARING what the
  handler returned.  INT 24h answers in AL, and dos_entry mounted the
  boot volume BEFORE installing the vectors, so a failed boot read
  would have called an IRETD that returned AL unchanged - AL held the
  drive number, and nought is "ignore".  The kernel would have
  carried on with an unread sector, silently, only on the machines
  where the boot disk was bad.  The fix is ordering, and the rule it
  leaves behind is: anything that can touch a disk belongs after the
  vector block.
* A LOCK HELD ACROSS SOMEONE ELSE'S CODE NEEDS A WAY BACK.  The
  kernel locks INT 24h for the length of a handler and unlocks when
  it IRETs - but COMMAND's handler does not always IRET: for Abort
  and for ^C it longjmps to its prompt, which would carry the lock
  off and leave every later critical error answering itself "fail"
  in silence, forever, invisibly.  Hence 21h/F1h AL=5.  Real DOS has
  the same hole and the same answer (the SDA's error-mode flag, put
  back by hand); the general shape is that any state a kernel keeps
  ACROSS a callback needs an escape hatch for the callback that never
  comes back.
* WASM CANNOT SIZE A FORWARD-REFERENCED EQU USED AS AN IMMEDIATE.
  "test dword ptr [dir_sw],SW_P" is E040 when SW_P is defined further
  down the file, and perfectly fine when it is defined further up -
  the error says "invalid instruction operands" and means "I do not
  know yet how wide that number is".  Switch masks and the like
  belong at the top of the file with the other equates, not tucked in
  beside the routine that owns them.
* FOUR RELEASES OF ROADMAP CAN BE ONE MISSING DISK.  "The 86Box
  floppy path is broken" survived as a defect in our code from v0.15
  to v0.21 on the strength of one symptom under one emulator.  Two
  lines of tracing showed INT 13h/08h succeeding with correct
  geometry and every read timing out, which is an empty drive, and
  the BIOS said the same thing on its own when the hard disk was
  hidden.  A symptom is not a diagnosis, and the cheapest instrument
  usually settles it faster than the cleverest theory.
* A BARE [CONSTANT] IS AN IMMEDIATE TO WASM, not a dereference.
  "mov eax,[PROG_PSP + PSP_PARENT]" loads the ADDRESS.  Kernel code
  never trips on this because it always has a register base, so it
  is test programs that reach for absolute addresses - and a test
  that reads the wrong thing reports the kernel wrong, which is the
  worst kind of wrong.  Write "dword ptr ds:[...]".
* ONE global handle table + "close everything on exit" = a child
  process closing its PARENT's files.  It stayed invisible for as
  long as every command was internal, and broke the instant CHOICE
  became an external: the batch file it was called from just stopped.
  Ownership has to be recorded at the point a handle is claimed.
* A FAT32 root directory is a CHAIN, not an area.  Writing it as a
  single cluster caps the root at spc*16 entries - 16 on a 512-byte
  cluster - and a boot disk passes that without trying.
* wasm's case-insensitive symbols bite hardest on SIZE CONSTANTS: a
  "for_body db FOR_BODY dup(0)" is a buffer colliding with its own
  length equ (E046).  Name the equ FORBODY_MAX, not FOR_BODY - the
  natural pairing is exactly the one that cannot work.
* 21h/4Dh CLEARS the exit code as it reads it, so a shell that passes
  IF ERRORLEVEL straight through to it gets the right answer once and
  zero every time after.  Consecutive IF ERRORLEVEL lines are the
  whole idiom, so COMMAND latches the code itself.
* SendKeys is not a transparent pipe when testing DOSBox: "%" is its
  ALT prefix and "(" ")" are grouping, so "FOR %F IN (1 2 3)" arrives
  as "FOR F IN 1 2 3" and the shell rightly says Syntax error.  Escape
  them as {%} {(} {)} - and read back what the screen echoed before
  believing a parser bug.
* 86Box keeps its OWN copy of the disk images inside the VM directory
  (hdd_NN_fn is relative to it).  Rebuilding BIN\HD16.IMG and booting
  the VM tests the previous build - the version banner is what caught
  it.  Copy the image into C:\86Box\VMs\PM-DOS after every build.
* IRQ remap must dodge BOTH the CPU exceptions (00-1F) and the DOS
  software interrupts (20-2F).  First cut used base 20h and the
  keyboard IRQ1 landed on vector 21h - the INT 21h hook wiped it.
  IRQs now live at 50h-5Fh.
* Every PM->RM BIOS call re-remaps the PIC to the BIOS layout
  (08h/70h) and back, DOS/4GW style, or the floppy BIOS never sees
  its timer tick / IRQ6 completion.
* OWNING IRQ 0 MEANS OWNING WHAT THE BIOS TICK DID.  Fixed in v0.32,
  and it is the trap rather than the fix that is worth keeping: the
  BIOS INT 8 is real-mode code that never runs here, so the floppy
  motor-off countdown at 40:40 AND the tick count at 40:6C both simply
  stopped.  The motor one sat here for eleven releases labelled
  "cosmetic" on an emulator's evidence, and is nothing of the kind on
  a real drive.  Anything else the BIOS did on a timer is ours too.
* A FIXED BUFFER IS A LIMIT ON WHAT THE SYSTEM WILL ACCEPT, and if no
  test disk can reach it, having tests says nothing about it.  Three
  bugs in v0.32 were one 8K buffer each: clus_buf capped mountable
  volumes at 8K clusters (so nothing over ~512MB would mount) and
  XFER_BUF was overrun by any cluster bigger than itself (so nothing
  over ~512MB would boot).  Both invisible because MKDISK hardcoded
  spc = 2 and could not build a disk with big clusters.  Use -spc.
* AN EMULATOR AGREEING WITH ANOTHER EMULATOR IS ONE DATA POINT, not
  two.  DOSBox and 86Box agreed about all three of the above, and both
  were wrong, because the thing none of them had was a disk formatted
  by MS-DOS on a drive of a size people actually owned.
* wasm quirks: absolute address constants need an explicit segment +
  size (mov eax,dword ptr ds:[GV_MEMTOP]); symbols are case-
  insensitive, so a gv_bootdrv label collides with a GV_BOOTDRV equ.
* wasm 1.9 EXPRESSION PARSER BUG: "A + B * (C) * D" evaluates as
  "(A + B*(C)) * D" - the trailing multiply hits the whole sum.  It
  cost an afternoon: the console scroll blanked "VGA row 24" at
  linear 170F00h instead of B8F00h, so scrolled screens kept stale
  text.  Parenthesize every compile-time address expression fully.
* Register-preservation trap (v0.3): dir_seek's sector-load path set
  EDI to sec_buf for the BIOS read and returned with it - and EDI is
  fat_search's pattern pointer, so every cache-miss search compared
  the directory against the volume label and found nothing.  Worse,
  the debug probe that dumped the first entry PRIMED the cache and
  made the bug vanish.  Hand-rolled push lists on shared helpers:
  preserve everything the register contract does not hand back.
* The LF-only text file staircase in TYPE is authentic DOS console
  behaviour, not a bug: the console does not translate LF to CRLF.
* DOSBox 0.74's "boot -l c" hands the boot sector DL = 00, not 80h.
  The MBR read CHS(0,1,1) off the FLOPPY, found no AA55 signature and
  said "Missing operating system" - looking exactly like a bad image.
  Both boot sectors now clamp a sub-80h DL up to 80h (the VBR only
  when its hidden-sector count is nonzero, i.e. it really is a
  partition).  Real BIOSes get this right; emulators and old loaders
  do not, which is why real MBRs have carried this guard for decades.
  Lesson: when a boot sector fails, print DL before blaming the disk.
  MBRBOOT.ASM keeps that instrumentation behind -dMBR_DEBUG, which
  prints [DL] and <the signature word it read>.
* PUSHAD/POPAD is the wrong idiom for a routine with an out-parameter
  in a register.  fl_read hands BX back advanced past the data so the
  caller can keep feeding it in, but POPAD restored the caller's
  original BX - so every cluster of IBMIO.SYS landed on top of the
  first one, and stage 2 jumped into garbage with nothing on screen
  to say why.  It now carries BX across the POPAD in a variable.
* An 8-bit move into AL silently corrupts a 32-bit value you were
  keeping in EAX.  The CHS path held the cylinder in EAX, then did
  "mov al,<devsel byte>" before pushing it - so every read went to
  cylinder 00A0h instead of 0.  The drive reported NO ERROR: it just
  returned a different, all-zero sector, and the only symptom was
  "cannot mount the boot volume".  Wrong-address bugs on a disk look
  like corruption, not like failure.  Keep an out-of-range value in a
  register whose low byte you are not about to reuse.
* A drive's CHS translation is whatever was last programmed into it,
  normally by the BIOS at POST, and need NOT match the geometry
  IDENTIFY reports as its default.  ATA.INC issues INITIALIZE DEVICE
  PARAMETERS (91h) to state the geometry it intends to use rather
  than assuming.
* Emulator input: DOSBox 0.74 takes SendKeys once genuinely focused,
  but 86Box reads RAW INPUT and translates the SCAN CODE, so
  SendKeys (which delivers scan code 0) is silently ignored.  Driving
  86Box needs SendInput with KEYEVENTF_SCANCODE and real Set-1 codes.
* The rename cost the floppy boot sector a byte it did not have.
  "PM-DOS loading..." is one character longer than "DOS32 loading...",
  BOOT.ASM had nothing spare, and the link came out at 513 bytes.
  Reclaimed with "add bh,2" in place of "add bx,512": the same +512,
  the same carry out of BX for the 64K-wrap test, one byte shorter, and
  still 8086.  Measuring it turned up something tighter than it looks -
  datastart's two bytes ARE 1FEh-1FFh, and the 0AA55h signature
  overwrites them.  Harmless, because datastart is written from the
  root-directory size before it is ever read, but it means this
  sector's real ceiling is 200h rather than 1FEh, and one byte past
  THAT would put a live variable at 0000:7E00 - inside the FAT buffer,
  where the chain walk would eat it.  BOOT.ASM now asserts that
  ceiling, the way BOOTHD.ASM already asserted its own.
  (0.29 gave the byte back with interest: dropping "PM-DOS
  loading..." and " ok" left 41 spare.  The "add bh,2" stays - it is
  not wrong, and the next thing this sector has to learn will want
  the room.)
* BUILD.CMD compiled MKDISK.EXE only "if not exist", so editing
  MKDISK.C changed nothing.  The rename went into every source file and
  the hard-disk images still came out stamped DOS32 - because the OEM
  name and volume label of a hard-disk VBR are written by the TOOL,
  while the floppy's come from the assembled BOOT.ASM.  That is exactly
  why the floppy was right and only the hard disks were wrong, which
  reads like a boot-sector bug and is not one.  BUILD.CMD now compares
  timestamps: "dir /b /o:d" lists oldest first, so the last name the
  loop lands on is the newest.  A build step with no dependency check
  is an edit that silently did not happen.
* Boot sectors are assembled twice from one source (BOOTHD.ASM) with
  a conditional BPB.  Both sizes are asserted at assembly time - the
  BPB span, because MKDISK splices its own BPB in over exactly that
  range and a drift would have it cutting into code, and the total,
  because overrunning 1FEh would eat the signature.

INT 21h conventions (flat-mode deviations)
------------------------------------------
Pointers that DOS took in DS:DX / DS:SI arrive as flat 32-bit EDX /
ESI.  Counts are ECX.  42h takes the seek offset in ECX and returns
EAX.  48h/49h/4Ah deal in bytes at EDX, not paragraphs/ES.  36h and
47h take the drive in DL (0 = default, 1 = A:) - 47h callers MUST
set DL now.  Errors: CF + code in AX as always.  Implemented: 00-02,
06-0E, 19, 1A, 25, 2A, 2C, 2F, 30, 33, 35, 36, 39-42, 44-4A, 4C-4F,
50-52, 56, 58, 62, 71xx, 7303h, plus two PM-DOS extensions: F0h console
(AL=0 cls, 1 get cursor, 2 set cursor) and F1h kernel information
(AL=0 -> BH.BL = version, AL=1 -> AL = a volume's FAT type, AL=2 ->
remount a volume whose structures were rewritten underneath us,
AL=3 -> the shell's own path ASCIIZ into EDX, AL=4 -> EAX = extended
memory in KB and EBX = the top of the arena, AL=5 -> release the
INT 24h lock).  The two volume calls take the drive in DL (0 =
default, 1 = A:) and exist for SYS and FORMAT; AL=3 exists so COMSPEC
can name the interpreter SHELL= actually chose, AL=4 so MEM can
report the machine rather than just the arena, and AL=5 so a
critical-error handler that goes home instead of returning - which is
what COMMAND does for Abort and for ^C - does not carry the kernel's
error-mode lock away with it.  30h deliberately still answers "DOS 5" - it is what
programs test - and 3306h answers the truth.  52h returns a kernel
information block whose dword at [EBX-4] is the first arena header,
the flat reading of the one list-of-lists field with a fixed meaning.
7303h (extended free space) takes EDX -> a path naming the drive,
EDI -> the record and ECX = its size, and exists because 36h's
16-bit registers saturate at 65535 clusters; the record's offsets are
the F73_* equates in PMDOS.INC, and a short buffer gets a short
answer rather than a stack full of holes.

Roadmap
-------
KEEP THIS SECTION HONEST.  It listed four items as pending that had
been finished between v0.22 and v0.25 - wiring the VDM into
COMMAND.COM, EXEC nesting, the guest's environment and the command
tail - and a stale roadmap is worse than no roadmap, because the next
person to read it (including the author, six weeks later) plans around
work that is already done.  Anything finished comes OUT of this list
in the same commit that finishes it.

THE NEXT THINGS, in the order they are worth doing:

* BACK TO REAL HARDWARE WITH v0.32.  The 486 pass found three bugs
  (see v0.32) and they are fixed and verified here, but only against
  a disk BUILT to have 16K clusters - not against one MS-DOS itself
  formatted, which is the actual article.  What is still owed from
  that session: does C: mount now, and does the floppy light go out.
* THE NULL GUARD IS STILL UNVERIFIED and only iron can finish it.  It
  is installed and right as far as an emulator can show - DR7 reads
  back DDDD06AA out of the CPU - but neither DOSBox 0.74 nor 86Box
  4.2.1 implements data breakpoints in either core, so CRASH /N
  survives on both.  Nothing more can be learned about it here
* SYS16 ON THE 486 was where the hardware session started and it did
  not get past copying PMIO.SYS.  v0.32 gave it the diagnostics it
  should always have had - it prints the directory it will take the
  system files FROM before writing anything, and its three failure
  paths now print distinct messages with the DOS error code and both
  paths tried - but the underlying failure has not been seen since,
  because writing BIN\PMDOS.IMG to a floppy directly turned out to be
  the better route to a booted machine.  Rerun it when there is a
  reason to convert a disk in place rather than write an image
* THE API GAPS ARE CLOSED, and this item stays only to say what was
  deliberately left out of the last one.  v0.30 closed 34h, 57h, 59h
  and the device namespace; v0.31 closed 44h's subfunctions, 5Ah,
  5Bh, 60h, 68h/6Ah, 2Eh/54h and 03h/04h/05h; 2026-08-12 closed 1Bh,
  1Ch, 38h, 5Ch, 63h, 65h, 67h and 6Ch.  WHAT 65h DOES NOT DO: the
  five subfunctions that hand back a TABLE - 02h uppercase, 04h
  filename uppercase, 05h filename terminators, 06h collating, 07h
  DBCS - answer "invalid function".  Each is a far pointer to 258
  bytes that would have to sit in conventional memory for a guest to
  read, which is most of a kilobyte of a DOS box's 624K spent saying
  what fn65's own 20h/21h/22h compute for codepage 437.  A program
  refused one falls back to its own table and gets the same answer.
  If something real ever asks, the guest block is where they go
* THE FCB SET (0Fh-17h, 21h-24h, 27h-29h).  Charlie has flagged this
  as wanted eventually, for 100% backward compatibility, and that is
  a fair reason - it is the one remaining API a pre-1985 program can
  ask for and be told does not exist.  About twenty functions, and
  they are not hard, but they need somewhere to keep an FCB's open
  file: the PSP has two FCB slots that PM-DOS deliberately leaves
  empty, and an FCB is a caller-owned structure holding what an SFT
  holds here.  29h (parse filename) is the useful one to write first
  because it is self-contained and other things call it.  Worth doing
  after ring 3, not before - it is a lot of new surface on a program
  model that is about to change
* RING 3 FOR NATIVE PROGRAMS.  v0.30 made a D32 program's fault
  survivable; it did not make it CONTAINED.  A native program still
  runs at ring 0 in the kernel's own segment, so it can still scribble
  on the kernel before it faults, and the recovery is honest about
  being a best effort rather than a guarantee.  Running native
  programs at ring 3 out of their own LDT is the real fix and is a
  release of its own - and it is only worth doing if PM-DOS is meant
  to be genuinely protected rather than DOS-shaped.  It also brings
  the REAL null-pointer guard with it: a non-zero segment base makes
  linear 0 unreachable from a program without unmapping anything,
  which is the thing v0.31 could not do with page tables
* A TSR POPPING UP FROM THE NATIVE PROMPT.  v0.31 issues INT 28h into
  a running DOS box, which covers the spooler case.  What it does not
  cover is the one people picture: a TSR loaded in one box, then a
  hotkey pressed at the COMMAND.COM prompt.  That is INT 9, not INT
  28h, and reaching a real-mode INT 9 handler while native 32-bit code
  is running means an excursion started from the keyboard interrupt
  rather than from a DOS call.  The machinery exists (dpmi_simint);
  the question is whether an excursion out of an IRQ is safe, and it
  wants thinking about rather than trying
* VERIFY, ACTUALLY VERIFYING.  2Eh/54h remember the flag as of v0.31
  and nothing reads it.  Doing the job means the block layer reading
  every written sector back and comparing, which is a real piece of
  work and doubles the cost of a write when it is on
* PAGING: no swap file, ever - the ambition is dropped and the
  CONFIG.SYS statements that recorded it are gone as of v0.19.  What
  page tables would still buy is ADDRESS ALIASING: map the one
  program-slot address onto a different physical frame per nesting
  level and the 512K park-and-restore copy becomes a pointer swap.
  That is paging WITHOUT a swap file, it is the only version with a
  concrete customer here, and it is worth taking up when the copying
  actually hurts - which at 512K a level on a 128MB machine it does
  not yet
* 4Bh AL=1 (load without executing) and AL=3 (load overlay) are
  unimplemented.  AL=3 may never be: an overlay is a piece of code
  loaded into the caller's own memory at an address the caller picks,
  and a D32 image is linked for one absolute address
* INT 24h is done as of v0.20.  What is NOT covered, and would be the
  natural next pieces: a CHARACTER-device critical error (the AH bit-7
  form - PRN out of paper, say - is understood by both the kernel
  helper and COMMAND's handler, but nothing raises one because no
  device driver detects anything), and INT 24h out of a WRITE that
  failed for a reason the block layer never sees, e.g. a full disk
* 714Eh renders its 8.3 field the same way 4Eh used to, so if
  anything ever searches for a volume label through the LFN find it
  will want the same not-a-filename guard fn4E just got
* FORMAT does not validate label characters (it accepted "MY VOL D:",
  colon and all); real FORMAT rejects the separator set
* A LOSSY 8.3 NAME STILL FINDS THE TRUNCATED FILE.  Asking for
  "SUBQ.CMDCMDTEST.CMD" opens SUBQ.CMD, because fat_search takes the
  long match as an EXTRA way to hit rather than a replacement for the
  8.3 one: the name converts (lossily) to SUBQ.CMD, no long name
  matches, and the 8.3 pattern still does.  v0.11 fixed the silent
  TRUNCATION but not this half.  The fix is for resolve to refuse the
  8.3 fallback when rp_flong says the conversion lost information -
  contained, but it touches every lookup, so it wants its own release
  and its own regression pass rather than a corner of someone else's
* the floppy path on real hardware is STILL unverified, but it is no
  longer a suspected defect - see the v0.21 note.  86Box will not
  insert a floppy image for this VM, so the drive is empty and every
  read times out correctly.  What remains is genuinely untested, not
  known-broken, and the way to test it is to get a disk into the
  emulated drive by hand and then run BUILD FDD
* DMF disks (1.68MB, 21 sectors per track) - READING them is not a
  controller problem at all: any 765/82077 reads 21 sectors of a
  track that physically has them.  What blocks it is where BLOCK.INC gets
  its geometry - INT 13h/08h, i.e. the BIOS's idea of the DRIVE (18
  spt for a 1.44M unit) rather than the BPB's idea of the DISK.
  Sourcing GEO_SPT/GEO_HEADS from the BPB (offsets 18h/1Ah) for
  removable media fixes the addressing; a stubborn BIOS may also
  want the INT 1Eh diskette parameter table patched (byte 4 = spt,
  byte 7 = gap), which is exactly what the DMF drivers of the day
  did.  CREATING one is the hard half and needs the low-level format
  PM-DOS deliberately does not have: INT 13h/AH=05h with a 21-entry
  sector list and a reduced GAP3.  So: reading is a contained
  change, formatting is a new capability
* DIRCMD (default DIR switches from the environment) once DIR has
  switches worth defaulting
* FORMAT /S (system files after formatting - SYS's job, already
  written), /V:label on the command line, and /U vs /Q semantics
* CTTY properly, once there is a device chain to redirect onto
* a write-behind buffer for a redirected stdout, if per-character
  02h output into files ever shows up on real iron (09h already
  writes blocks)
* DEVICE= / DEVICEHIGH= for real.  The VDM they were waiting for
  arrived in v0.22, so the blocker is gone; what is still missing is
  a DEVICE CHAIN for the drivers on those lines to join.  v0.30 built
  the first half of that without meaning to - dev_find is a name
  table and dev_in/dev_out a dispatch, which is what a device chain
  is, minus the ability for a loaded driver to add an entry
* INSTALL=, whose blocker (nested EXEC) went in v0.18 and which is
  therefore just waiting to be written; SET=, which still needs a
  master environment the kernel owns and hands to the shell
* multi-config for real: a [menu] the user chooses from, rather than
  reading every block and choosing from none
* more PM-DOS CONFIG.SYS statements as the product matures - the
  table in DOS\CONFIG.INC is where they go
* bus-master DMA (UDMA/33) on top of ATA.INC: PCI enumeration for the
  BMIDE base, a PRD table, and SET FEATURES mode selection.  PM-DOS is
  flat and unpaged, so linear IS physical and PRD entries can use our
  addresses directly - the usual translation/pinning problem simply
  does not arise here
* ATAPI on top of ATA.INC, for CD-ROM support
* 32-bit PIO (rep insd on the VLB/PCI data port) - roughly double the
  throughput for a few lines, but only on controllers that allow it
* nested EXEC is DONE (v0.18, by parking the occupant).  What is not
  done is doing it by RELOCATION or with more slots, which would turn
  the 512K park copy into nothing at all - see the paging note above
* DIRCMD aside, the COPY and DIR switch work is done in v0.21.  Still
  missing: COPY /V and /A /B, DIR /S and /O, DEL /S
* a device chain a loaded driver can join (INT 24h itself is done, in
  v0.20; the built-in devices went in in v0.30).  CTTY and a
  character-device critical error both wait on this
* keyboard: E0 cursor pad, F-keys through 3Fh, typematic settings
* INT 13h extensions (LBA) in PMIO for disks past the CHS horizon.
  The GUEST-facing half is done in v0.27 - a DOS box gets 41h, 42h,
  43h and 48h out of DOS\INT13.INC - but PMIO still reaches the BIOS
  by CHS when it is not using ATA directly, so a BIOS-only machine
  with a disk past the CHS horizon is still short of it
* the rest of the FAT32 API family beyond 7303h: 7302h get DPB,
  7304h set DPB, 7305h extended absolute read/write
